[Amit Varma]: This episode of The Seen and The Unseen is brought to you by Intel.
[Amit Varma]: What is the economy?
[Amit Varma]: The economy is the lives of real people.
[Amit Varma]: One of my constant laments is that too often we think of the economy as something abstract,
[Amit Varma]: numbers and graphs and charts and claims and counterclaims,
[Amit Varma]: rather than the story of our lives, which is what it is.
[Amit Varma]: And I find it useful to remind myself of this from time to time.
[Amit Varma]: We tend to be too glib when we talk about the economy.
[Amit Varma]: We should not be glib.
[Amit Varma]: Everything that affects the economy affects our lives.
[Amit Varma]: Every time a number falls or rises, it affects our happiness.
[Amit Varma]: It affects whether some child somewhere will have food to eat tonight.
[Amit Varma]: That is why we must keep talking about the economy.
[Amit Varma]: It has moral importance and humanitarian consequences.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen,
[Unknown]: our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: In today's episode, I want to take stock of the economy as it is right now.
[Amit Varma]: This is complicated.
[Amit Varma]: Firstly, our economy has been going down for over a decade
[Amit Varma]: due to the myopia and misgovernance of successive governments.
[Amit Varma]: I've done episodes taking stock of the economy at regular intervals,
[Amit Varma]: and even before COVID struck, things were pretty bad.
[Amit Varma]: After COVID struck, of course, it all entered a strange kind of twilight zone.
[Amit Varma]: My guests today have been on the show before.
[Amit Varma]: Pooja Mehra is the author of the brilliant book, The Lost Decade,
[Amit Varma]: which lays out in acute detail how our economy suffered
[Amit Varma]: between 2008 and 2018 when the book was published.
[Amit Varma]: She was also my guest on The Seen and The Unseen
[Amit Varma]: in an episode that I found so insightful.
[Amit Varma]: I will link it from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: My other guest is Mohit Satyanand, who has been on the show multiple times.
[Amit Varma]: All those episodes will also be linked from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: Now, few people I know can see the big picture quite like Mohit can,
[Amit Varma]: and few can capture the small details the way Pooja does.
[Amit Varma]: So basically, in terms of guests for this podcast, Rab Ne Bana Di Jori.
[Amit Varma]: I recorded this episode in person with Pooja and Mohit last week in Delhi,
[Amit Varma]: and I also managed to get Mohit to start a newsletter.
[Amit Varma]: Mohit is a beast of a writer,
[Amit Varma]: so do subscribe to his newsletter at mohitsatyanand.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: That's mohitsatyanand.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: Expect wisdom.
[Amit Varma]: Now, this episode was recorded before the repeal of the farm laws,
[Amit Varma]: so we don't mention that.
[Amit Varma]: But I'd have nothing to add beyond my conversation with Ajay Shah
[Amit Varma]: in episode 211 of this podcast, which is one of our most popular episodes.
[Amit Varma]: I'll link that also from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: It's such a complex subject,
[Amit Varma]: and almost no aspect of it can be seen in terms of black and white.
[Amit Varma]: Now, before we get to my conversation with Mohit and Pooja,
[Amit Varma]: let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Where do we live in this world?
[Amit Varma]: This is not a question about geography, or at least physical geography.
[Amit Varma]: The place I spend a lot of time is the internet,
[Amit Varma]: where I forge digital connections,
[Amit Varma]: take comfort and stimulation from virtual spaces traveling at the speed of light.
[Amit Varma]: Too much of this, and we can get unmoored from our physical location,
[Amit Varma]: a creature of every place and no place at the same time.
[Amit Varma]: But if we don't go overboard, this is so empowering.
[Amit Varma]: This new way of living and learning and loving has transformed at least me,
[Amit Varma]: and it's all because of technology.
[Amit Varma]: The sponsor of this episode, Intel, is at the heart of much of this digital transformation.
[Amit Varma]: Intel's technology empowers users at the edges of this brave new world.
[Amit Varma]: It safeguards their data, protects their privacy,
[Amit Varma]: while also enabling them to harness the full power of the internet.
[Amit Varma]: Whether you're an entrepreneur or an artist or a doctor or an engineer,
[Amit Varma]: you are not who you would have been 20 years ago.
[Amit Varma]: Intel made all this possible.
[Amit Varma]: Where there's digital transformation, there's Intel.
[Amit Varma]: Pooja and Mohit, welcome to The Scene and The Unseen.
[Unknown]: Thanks, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to begin by referring to this beautiful book I read a few years back,
[Amit Varma]: and it's a book by an author called Chyna Meevil,
[Amit Varma]: who typically writes science fiction and fantasy and so on,
[Amit Varma]: and his mother was a big fan of police procedurals.
[Amit Varma]: So at one point in time, his mother was rather ill,
[Amit Varma]: and eventually she died,
[Amit Varma]: and he wanted to write a book that would satisfy her,
[Amit Varma]: which was a police procedural.
[Amit Varma]: But he couldn't let go of his innate love for weirdness
[Amit Varma]: over what is known as weird fiction.
[Amit Varma]: So he wrote this book called The City in the City.
[Amit Varma]: And the plot of The City in the City is that
[Amit Varma]: there are two cities inhabiting the same space,
[Amit Varma]: invisible to each other,
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and The Unseen, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a police inspector,
[Amit Varma]: which is where the police procedural angle comes in.
[Amit Varma]: There's a police inspector who is investigating a murder,
[Amit Varma]: which he realized took place in the other city,
[Amit Varma]: which is actually occupying exactly the same spaces, right?
[Amit Varma]: It's, and he has to go into the other city
[Amit Varma]: to figure out what happened.
[Amit Varma]: It's very interesting.
[Amit Varma]: Now, just looking at that as a metaphor for it,
[Amit Varma]: for our current times,
[Amit Varma]: I think we are living that kind of dual existence
[Amit Varma]: in a couple of ways.
[Amit Varma]: One way, of course, is a rather obvious one,
[Amit Varma]: that some aspects of the economy are obviously out of whack
[Amit Varma]: and things are going to hell,
[Amit Varma]: and other aspects like the booming stock market
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, they look just fantastic.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time,
[Amit Varma]: where I find this metaphor most potent is perceptions,
[Amit Varma]: that there are people who really believe
[Amit Varma]: that India is going to be a superpower,
[Amit Varma]: that everything is in place and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time,
[Amit Varma]: there are people who believe that we are going to hell.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm much closer to the second category, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: as you know, as I've, you know,
[Amit Varma]: through all the economy episodes that I've done.
[Amit Varma]: And before we actually start talking about the economy
[Amit Varma]: or start discussing what is real and what is not,
[Amit Varma]: why do you think we are in this situation
[Amit Varma]: where there is, so to say, a city and a city,
[Amit Varma]: where there are two realities?
[Guest 1]: So, I want to throw in another dimension,
[Guest 1]: which is that I inhabit two worlds,
[Guest 1]: which you know about.
[Guest 1]: So, one world is the world of the city
[Guest 1]: and the world of the stock markets.
[Guest 1]: And we've had more than one occasion
[Guest 1]: to talk about stock markets,
[Guest 1]: beginning with your shortest episode,
[Amit Varma]: which was about Rupal Bench.
[Amit Varma]: Which was 11 minutes, my shortest episode.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: So, I inhabit that world of which a subset
[Guest 1]: or almost a forerunner of that world
[Guest 1]: is now the world of startups.
[Guest 1]: But the other world that I inhabit
[Guest 1]: is the little mountain village
[Guest 1]: in which I've had a home for almost 30 years now.
[Guest 1]: And I'm not just an occasional visitor
[Guest 1]: and it's not a rich people's enclave.
[Guest 1]: I've been part of that village.
[Guest 1]: And so, I've actually seen now two generations
[Guest 1]: living in that village.
[Guest 1]: So, I'm not a researcher, I'm not a scholar,
[Guest 1]: I'm not even a reporter,
[Guest 1]: but I'm a reasonably observant person
[Guest 1]: and I live in their world.
[Guest 1]: You know, I don't meet my city neighbors
[Guest 1]: or I live in the middle of the village.
[Guest 1]: And these two cities are completely different
[Guest 1]: and that's my link with a different reality.
[Guest 1]: And it's always given me reality checks.
[Guest 1]: And there are a lot of blinking red lights in that city.
[Guest 1]: Can you elaborate on that?
[Guest 1]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: Most of my observations about that city
[Guest 1]: and perhaps we can talk about them later
[Guest 1]: are more of the long-term nature.
[Guest 1]: Because I've seen hopes, aspirations, actions taken
[Guest 1]: as a result of those hopes and aspirations,
[Guest 1]: particularly with regard to education
[Guest 1]: and where they've ended up.
[Guest 1]: But this year, I've seen a lot more
[Guest 1]: and this year I spent six months in the village.
[Guest 1]: I just came back 10 days ago
[Guest 1]: and I saw things that I've never seen before.
[Guest 1]: The first time ever in 30 years,
[Guest 1]: walking on the main road,
[Guest 1]: I had somebody stop and ask me
[Guest 1]: whether I could give him work.
[Guest 1]: It has never happened to me.
[Guest 1]: I felt lousy because I had four staff.
[Guest 1]: I was overstaffed.
[Guest 1]: I wasn't letting anybody go.
[Guest 1]: I had to say no.
[Guest 2]: I'm curious, was this person working in the city?
[Guest 2]: I mean, in urban areas before and just lost his job?
[Guest 2]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: And I was coming to that,
[Guest 1]: which is that in a radius of four kilometers,
[Guest 1]: now four kilometers can mean very different things
[Guest 1]: in different parts of the world.
[Guest 1]: Four kilometers radius in South Delhi,
[Guest 1]: where we are now, would probably be a million people.
[Guest 1]: Four kilometers radius in that mountain village
[Guest 1]: is probably about 400 people.
[Guest 1]: I'm not exaggerating.
[Guest 1]: I know at least six men between 20 and 40
[Guest 1]: who came back from the city because there was no work
[Guest 1]: and they're making do.
[Guest 1]: What I liked was the can-do spirit.
[Guest 1]: Nobody's just sitting at home and be mourning their loss.
[Guest 1]: They're trying to do something.
[Guest 1]: They're willing to work with their hands.
[Guest 1]: Two young men are running a dhaba.
[Guest 1]: I asked them how the dhaba is doing.
[Guest 1]: And so at first it was, oh, it's good.
[Guest 1]: But that dhaba became my turnaround point
[Guest 1]: when I was coming back from the city.
[Guest 1]: Turnaround point, when I ran from the house down the road,
[Guest 1]: the dhaba was my turnaround point.
[Guest 1]: And I would stop there and ask them for a glass of water.
[Guest 1]: And I got to chatting with them and they said,
[Guest 1]: look, we are making one fifth of what we made in the city.
[Guest 1]: But we know that there's nothing in the city.
[Guest 1]: And so we're making do.
[Guest 1]: The second, which is not directly related to the economy,
[Guest 1]: but I think it has very profound repercussions down the line,
[Guest 1]: is that kids did not go to school for a year and a half or two.
[Guest 1]: And they've forgotten everything.
[Guest 1]: Whether you're talking about six or seven-year-olds
[Guest 1]: or you're talking about kids in the 10th or 11th standard.
[Guest 1]: Kids were passed from the 9th into the 10th
[Guest 1]: and now they're going into the 11th.
[Guest 1]: Having studied for three months in the 9th,
[Guest 1]: not studied at all through the 10th and now entering the 11th.
[Guest 1]: Two months after the academic year would have started.
[Guest 1]: As it is in that village, Amit,
[Guest 1]: the pass percentage typically at the board level is 26%.
[Guest 1]: What is it going to be now?
[Amit Varma]: We'll come back to talking about the immediate aftermath of COVID
[Amit Varma]: and a lot of this also relates to that.
[Amit Varma]: And previous guests have also given me some insight into that.
[Amit Varma]: But just to continue with that question of the city in the city,
[Amit Varma]: part of this is really a question,
[Amit Varma]: not just a division in the economy,
[Amit Varma]: say in a place like Satholi or the economy in this,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in one sphere of the economy,
[Amit Varma]: like the stock market and another sphere,
[Amit Varma]: but also in perceptions.
[Amit Varma]: And you've, Pooja, been a journalist yourself,
[Amit Varma]: you've been active on social media
[Amit Varma]: and what you must have noticed with great dismay,
[Amit Varma]: as I have over the last few years,
[Amit Varma]: is that it's become such a polarized space
[Amit Varma]: where there is no space for nuance,
[Amit Varma]: like no longer is a policy evaluated on the basis of
[Amit Varma]: how good or bad the policy might be.
[Amit Varma]: And all policies will contain a mix of good and bad,
[Amit Varma]: except for demonetization, which was all bad.
[Amit Varma]: What we see today is that people choose their tribe.
[Amit Varma]: They go by the tribe.
[Amit Varma]: Everything one tribe, their tribe does is good.
[Amit Varma]: Everything the other tribe does is bad.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, it is a natural division,
[Amit Varma]: where if you say anything bad about the economy,
[Amit Varma]: you will have defensive screaming and shouting and trolling.
[Amit Varma]: And if you say anything good about the economy
[Amit Varma]: or anything good that the government might do,
[Amit Varma]: you will have a similar reaction from the other side.
[Amit Varma]: And you've, of course, been at the receiving end of this
[Amit Varma]: multiple times from all sides,
[Amit Varma]: because you write it as you see it,
[Amit Varma]: and the world is complex and the economy is complex.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about this increasing trend.
[Amit Varma]: Like, am I overperceiving it because I spend so much time on Twitter?
[Amit Varma]: You know, or what's your kind of sense?
[Amit Varma]: Does it become more difficult for you as a journalist
[Amit Varma]: to do financial journalism, to write it as you see it?
[Amit Varma]: Because there is no appetite for that kind of complexity anymore.
[Guest 2]: Actually, Amit, what you're saying about social media is absolutely right.
[Guest 2]: People are no longer interested on the social media
[Guest 2]: in what's going on in the economy.
[Guest 2]: They're more interested in who are we going to say is right
[Guest 2]: and who we are going to say is wrong.
[Guest 2]: And that is almost always, you know,
[Guest 2]: which country they belong to or which ideology they subscribe to,
[Guest 2]: whose supporter they are.
[Guest 2]: And so most people who used to earlier come to social media,
[Guest 2]: Twitter, especially, you know, to read new things,
[Guest 2]: to figure out new things to read about,
[Guest 2]: for conversations to learn about new things,
[Guest 2]: are withdrawing because it's just politics.
[Guest 2]: It's no longer about the economy.
[Guest 2]: Is this becoming a problem to do financial journalism?
[Guest 2]: Actually, no.
[Guest 2]: I think I get trolled for this.
[Guest 2]: But, you know, I have now been a financial journalist
[Guest 2]: during the tenures of multiple governments.
[Guest 2]: I don't think this government is more adversarial to me
[Guest 2]: than the previous government was.
[Guest 2]: Yes, there is a new rule that the
[Guest 2]: incumbent finance minister introduced
[Guest 2]: soon after she became the finance minister,
[Guest 2]: where she doesn't allow us to enter
[Guest 2]: North Block, the finance ministry,
[Guest 2]: and which is strange because, you know,
[Guest 2]: when a journalist enters North Block
[Guest 2]: and meets senior bureaucrats,
[Guest 2]: you're not going to go meet junior bureaucrats.
[Guest 2]: When you meet senior bureaucrats,
[Guest 2]: sometimes in the corridor for two seconds,
[Guest 2]: you know, almost always, what are you getting?
[Guest 2]: You're getting their version, you know,
[Guest 2]: their response to something that is being talked about.
[Guest 2]: And you're helping them put out their version.
[Guest 2]: And, you know, that sort of generates a debate
[Guest 2]: or, you know, creates an input into the public discourse.
[Guest 2]: It is almost always helping them, you know.
[Guest 2]: So I never understood why she introduced this new rule.
[Guest 2]: In whatever little one-on-one interactions
[Guest 2]: I've had with her,
[Guest 2]: I found her contrary to her public image,
[Guest 2]: quite well informed, quite articulate,
[Guest 2]: quite willing to listen
[Guest 2]: and very well read as well.
[Guest 2]: So I don't understand why she doesn't want journalists
[Guest 2]: to do the job that, you know,
[Guest 2]: finance ministry beach reporters were doing earlier.
[Guest 2]: And whatever my personal experience is,
[Guest 2]: I've been very critical of this government
[Guest 2]: as I was of the government before this.
[Guest 2]: I have not found anybody holding that against me.
[Guest 2]: I have not found access being reduced.
[Guest 2]: So maybe this is my experience.
[Guest 2]: It is not the same experience with other journalists.
[Guest 2]: But, you know, it's not made my job
[Guest 2]: as a financial journalist difficult.
[Guest 2]: And I also want to say that I've had
[Guest 2]: very, very few instances of editors
[Guest 2]: refusing to publish a submission
[Guest 2]: which is too critical or, you know, not in line,
[Guest 2]: maybe not, maybe praising something
[Guest 2]: that they don't want praised, either ways.
[Guest 2]: So that is there a bit, at least in Delhi,
[Guest 2]: I find editors are sensitive.
[Guest 2]: Sometimes pieces, submissions are not published,
[Guest 2]: but it's not as bad as the, you know,
[Guest 2]: the chat on Twitter suggests.
[Guest 2]: That said, on television, it's really bad.
[Guest 2]: And even in print media, you know,
[Guest 2]: so when I was in day-to-day reporting,
[Guest 2]: we would almost always say that
[Guest 2]: the government today said this,
[Guest 2]: but the, you know, but the actual data is this, right?
[Guest 2]: So we would say that.
[Guest 2]: We would say Finance Minister P Chidambaram today said,
[Guest 2]: made a claim that this is what it is in the press conference.
[Guest 2]: But, you know, the facts are this.
[Guest 2]: It doesn't happen like that these days.
[Guest 2]: Nobody says the government today said this.
[Guest 2]: It is, this is what it is, you know,
[Guest 2]: as if what the government is saying
[Guest 2]: is the ultimate truth, you know,
[Guest 2]: and no facts need to be presented to show that,
[Guest 2]: well, you know, they're not giving you the full truth.
[Guest 2]: Those kind of fact checks, I would call them,
[Guest 2]: that were happening at a day-to-day basis
[Guest 2]: on daily reporting have just sort of gone off.
[Guest 1]: But I see some newspapers resorting to
[Guest 1]: slightly cleverer tactics.
[Guest 1]: So they'll print a piece,
[Guest 1]: which is clearly a government press release,
[Guest 1]: and they'll print something side-by-side,
[Guest 1]: which presents the facts.
[Unknown]: Yes.
[Unknown]: So it's a slightly cleverer way of doing it.
[Guest 1]: They're not buried in the same piece,
[Guest 1]: but they're there for the intelligent viewer to realize that
[Guest 1]: we are forced to say this
[Guest 1]: because this is what the Finance Minister,
[Guest 1]: for example, has said,
[Guest 1]: but this is our version of the reality.
[Guest 1]: But not every newspaper is going to do that.
[Guest 2]: And the other thing, sorry, Amit,
[Guest 2]: the other thing I want to say that, you know,
[Guest 2]: which I'm not a fan of is that,
[Guest 2]: you know, you have ministers and politicians
[Guest 2]: and bureaucrats, chief economic advisors, etc,
[Guest 2]: all the time on the news pages, right?
[Guest 2]: They get so much column space.
[Guest 2]: Why do they get now so much column space
[Guest 2]: on the opinion pages?
[Guest 2]: Everything that they're saying on news is often,
[Guest 2]: I mean, more than often their opinion,
[Guest 2]: you know, why do newspapers,
[Guest 2]: I mean, the Prime Minister,
[Guest 2]: you know, the President, the Vice President,
[Guest 2]: why are the opinion pages dominated by these individuals
[Guest 2]: who in any case get to say what they have to say?
[Guest 2]: Why is this space not being given,
[Guest 2]: you know, to other more neutral, more researched?
[Guest 2]: And, you know, we want to listen to a variety of opinions.
[Guest 2]: These people already get a lot of space in play.
[Amit Varma]: So, I have a slightly weird sounding question,
[Amit Varma]: which is, given the changes that you're talking about
[Amit Varma]: that back in the day,
[Amit Varma]: and like, first of all, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I, Mohit, I completely buy that.
[Amit Varma]: I've seen some newspapers do this as well,
[Unknown]: side by side, they'll print something like,
[Amit Varma]: much like the Telegraph of Calcutta famously will print,
[Amit Varma]: you know, quotes in that manner.
[Guest 1]: They'll put a quote.
[Guest 1]: Detective Herald as well.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So, which is very clever.
[Amit Varma]: But my point there is you shouldn't have to do that.
[Amit Varma]: Of course not.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, which takes me to the question
[Amit Varma]: that since people have to do that,
[Amit Varma]: since, you know, if the government says it is raining,
[Amit Varma]: you're not allowed to go to the window and say,
[Amit Varma]: see whether it's raining or not.
[Amit Varma]: You have to report what the government said.
[Amit Varma]: Have the journalists changed?
[Amit Varma]: Or have the journalists changed?
[Amit Varma]: In the sense that have a different set of people
[Amit Varma]: who are more pliable, taken over, you know,
[Amit Varma]: economic reporting and all that,
[Amit Varma]: or have the same set of people
[Amit Varma]: learn to moderate themselves?
[Guest 2]: You know, I think that is true.
[Guest 2]: Also, I see a rise in the middle career,
[Guest 2]: mid-career, mid-level levels of the hierarchies
[Guest 2]: in newspapers of very mediocre people,
[Guest 2]: people who are not specialists.
[Guest 2]: This is exactly what happens in television news channels,
[Guest 2]: where the anchors, the star anchors,
[Guest 2]: who especially the right wing,
[Guest 2]: you know, government supporters are always after,
[Guest 2]: you know, one day they're an expert on health,
[Guest 2]: the next day they're anchoring a programme on the economy,
[Guest 2]: the third day it's on Bollywood,
[Guest 2]: then it's crime, then it's politics.
[Guest 2]: They don't want to give space to, you know,
[Guest 2]: specialist journalists who have institutional memory
[Guest 2]: and experience of reporting from the ground.
[Guest 2]: On these, you know, these are very specialised topics.
[Guest 2]: These star journalists want to interview,
[Guest 2]: if an international economist is visiting India,
[Guest 2]: they want to interview the finance minister.
[Guest 2]: They don't want to let their economic editors
[Guest 2]: do it.
[Guest 2]: That reduces the quality of the journalism
[Guest 2]: being done on TV channels.
[Guest 2]: And it's sort of really crashed now.
[Guest 2]: And I see a similar thing happening in newspapers.
[Guest 2]: We don't see, you know,
[Guest 2]: if you look at the economic reporting
[Guest 2]: that is happening in newspapers,
[Guest 2]: if it doesn't have depth,
[Guest 2]: much of it is because journalists have become pliable,
[Guest 2]: because they are risk averse,
[Guest 2]: because they don't want to lose their job.
[Guest 2]: They don't know, you know, what's going to happen
[Guest 2]: because it is true that what people write
[Guest 2]: is very closely monitored.
[Unknown]: It was not monitored in this way earlier.
[Guest 2]: I won't be surprised.
[Guest 2]: In fact, I've heard of people,
[Guest 2]: editors of papers getting calls, complaints.
[Guest 2]: Some people got transferred out of Delhi,
[Guest 2]: women journalists.
[Guest 2]: So, you know, everybody's just being careful.
[Guest 2]: But the thing is that, you know,
[Guest 2]: you have to keep testing the boundary, you know.
[Guest 2]: But if you're a journalist, you know,
[Guest 2]: who doesn't know how they're going to pay
[Guest 2]: their next EMI and all,
[Guest 2]: you're not going to test the boundary.
[Guest 2]: So that phenomenon is sort of playing out.
[Guest 2]: I think this is more for the leadership in the media,
[Guest 2]: for them, you know, to sort of create that safe space
[Guest 2]: for mid-level journalists to be able to do a better job.
[Guest 2]: I am less willing to, you know,
[Guest 2]: sort of look at the mid-level and the junior journalists
[Guest 2]: and say, well, they're at fault.
[Guest 2]: They'll do, they take cues from their bosses.
[Guest 2]: So they'll do what, you know, they're allowed to do.
[Amit Varma]: So an interesting phrase I learned recently,
[Amit Varma]: which kind of expresses so much that is true about the world
[Amit Varma]: and interesting phenomenon rather is called
[Amit Varma]: the Gelman amnesia effect.
[Amit Varma]: Have you heard of it?
[Amit Varma]: So it's a phrase coined by Michael Crichton.
[Amit Varma]: His close friend was a physicist Murray Gelman.
[Amit Varma]: And Gelman once made the observation
[Amit Varma]: that when I read something in the newspaper
[Amit Varma]: about a field that I know very well,
[Amit Varma]: I know that it is nonsense.
[Amit Varma]: But the rest of what is in the newspaper
[Amit Varma]: about fields I don't know well,
[Amit Varma]: I will take it as a gospel truth.
[Amit Varma]: And he called this, you know,
[Guest 2]: This is absolutely right.
[Guest 2]: I feel this about The Economist magazine often.
[Amit Varma]: A lot of the things that we read about
[Guest 1]: what they write on India are quite off the mark, you know.
[Guest 1]: So in general, I think it's true, you know,
[Guest 1]: because even taking into account what Pooja said,
[Guest 1]: which is a more relative phenomenon,
[Guest 1]: which is of people not being able
[Guest 1]: to develop their speciality.
[Guest 1]: But even otherwise, I think that to some extent,
[Guest 1]: it's a natural phenomenon.
[Guest 1]: Because if I'm a practitioner,
[Guest 1]: there's no way that a journalist is going to know about
[Guest 1]: as much about that field as I am.
[Guest 1]: So that's bound to happen.
[Guest 1]: The extent to which it happens
[Guest 1]: is a matter of observation and judgment.
[Guest 1]: But it's bound to happen.
[Guest 1]: You know, I run a company,
[Guest 1]: an interviewer comes and interviews me about the company.
[Guest 1]: When I read it, I say,
[Guest 1]: it's got a few facts wrong, you know.
[Guest 1]: He can't know as much.
[Guest 1]: But I think there's a broader point there,
[Guest 1]: while I'm not denying anything of what you're saying.
[Guest 1]: The fear effect, the boundaries being reduced,
[Guest 1]: self-censorship, all of those I see.
[Guest 1]: But I think there's another factor at work,
[Guest 1]: which is that all my adult life,
[Guest 1]: Indian journalism has been very, very under-researched,
[Guest 1]: under-budgeted, under-researched.
[Guest 1]: So, you know, you compare it to an economist
[Guest 1]: or a Harvard Business Review or whatever,
[Guest 1]: they're going to assign a writer
[Guest 1]: for a month to do something like this.
[Guest 1]: Here you do it in two or three days.
[Guest 1]: So there's that phenomenon at work as well.
[Amit Varma]: Let's say that, let's say that.
[Amit Varma]: Often, you know, there are places I've heard of people
[Amit Varma]: under pressure to put out two stories a day.
[Amit Varma]: How can you do anything?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the reason I remember the Gelman-Amnesia effect
[Amit Varma]: is because of what you said about mediocrity kind of rising.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, it is true that while every specialist
[Amit Varma]: will feel that the journalism in the field,
[Amit Varma]: you know, cannot possibly be entirely accurate
[Amit Varma]: and get all the nuances.
[Amit Varma]: But what you see in journalism in the West,
[Amit Varma]: and even there, it's true that it's a lot of the time,
[Amit Varma]: it's quite shoddy and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But what you kind of see in the West is that
[Amit Varma]: there is at least that effort, that time given,
[Amit Varma]: like you mentioned, you have much more time to do stories.
[Amit Varma]: But over here, it's just rubbish.
[Amit Varma]: There's just no understanding.
[Amit Varma]: You go from beat to beat to beat.
[Amit Varma]: Now, this is OK for a lot of stuff.
[Amit Varma]: But I just feel that it is not OK for economics.
[Guest 2]: Or, you know, foreign policy, defense.
[Amit Varma]: Or foreign policy, defense.
[Amit Varma]: You just cannot have Monday morning quarterbacks,
[Amit Varma]: as it were, coming in and kind of giving gyan to this.
[Amit Varma]: And the sense I got from what you're saying
[Amit Varma]: is that there is more of that happening.
[Guest 2]: There is, I mean, you know,
[Guest 2]: for somebody who's never studied GDP in college,
[Guest 2]: to begin to interpret the GDP data,
[Guest 2]: when, you know, economists who have their entire careers
[Guest 2]: worked on this subject are telling us that,
[Guest 2]: you know, I'm finding, I mean, Arvind Subramanian,
[Guest 2]: for instance, wrote in the economic survey
[Guest 2]: that I'm puzzled by the GDP estimate.
[Guest 2]: But we had political journalists holding forth.
[Guest 1]: And, you know, so, I mean.
[Guest 1]: I am very puzzled by the GDP, you know.
[Guest 1]: I won't say I'm an economist,
[Guest 1]: but I have studied and I'm very puzzled by the GDP.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, quick plug.
[Amit Varma]: I had a great episode on GDP with Rajeshwari Sengupta.
[Guest 1]: I remember that one, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: The other thing that is happening in the journalistic space
[Amit Varma]: is that it is very muddied now
[Amit Varma]: by this mixture of opinion and news, number one,
[Amit Varma]: with all these Monday morning quarterbacks
[Amit Varma]: coming up with their estimates
[Amit Varma]: without knowing what the hell they're talking about.
[Amit Varma]: And also this need to drive narratives,
[Amit Varma]: like that's kind of led to an infusion of bullshit.
[Amit Varma]: And by bullshit, I don't mean that in a pejorative sense.
[Guest 1]: I think it's fine.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, I agree.
[Amit Varma]: Let me tell you the sense I mean it in.
[Amit Varma]: Harry Frankfurt wrote this great book called On Bullshit,
[Amit Varma]: where his theory was that bullshit is different from lies.
[Amit Varma]: Lies are when you know that something is false,
[Amit Varma]: you know the truth and you choose to lie.
[Amit Varma]: Bullshit is when you don't know anything.
[Amit Varma]: You're just saying whatever the hell comes into your mind.
[Guest 1]: But there's a third very important factor
[Guest 1]: which ties up with the need to be able to bullshit,
[Guest 1]: which is that we have seen such a massive reduction
[Guest 1]: in data production of the last seven years.
[Guest 1]: Data on the economy is not available.
[Guest 1]: India used to have a really sophisticated statistical system.
[Guest 1]: It was way ahead of where we were as a country.
[Guest 1]: As a country in our GDP, etc, etc.
[Guest 1]: There has been systematic destruction of that whole ecosystem.
[Guest 1]: To the extent that you've had people at the top
[Guest 1]: of the statistical system resigning.
[Guest 2]: Let me double click on this.
[Unknown]: Yeah, please.
[Guest 2]: Can I add to that?
[Guest 2]: Please, please.
[Guest 2]: So, we were talking about GDP.
[Guest 2]: So, the base is getting into slightly technical thing.
[Guest 2]: The base is revised every five years, right?
[Guest 2]: I sort of stay away from most conversations
[Guest 2]: in the economy these days because the GDP estimates,
[Guest 2]: you know, the base year has not been revised now for 10 years.
[Guest 2]: And last time when they revised it,
[Guest 2]: there was such a big noise because they had to,
[Guest 2]: they had to sort of revise downwards the previous estimates.
[Guest 2]: And there is a technical reason why that happens.
[Guest 2]: Because when you, you know, how they arrive at GDP estimates,
[Guest 2]: as both of you know, is that it's a combination
[Guest 2]: of a few surveys that are done in the base year.
[Guest 2]: And then, you know, a few surveys that are done year to year.
[Guest 2]: Year to year.
[Guest 2]: And they keep extrapolating on the basis of the base year,
[Guest 2]: what new information comes in, new data comes in,
[Guest 2]: new surveys come in.
[Guest 2]: When they extrapolate on the basis of the base year for 10 years,
[Guest 2]: they invariably end up inflating estimates.
[Guest 2]: You know, there are technical papers that people have written about this.
[Guest 2]: My fear is that, you know,
[Guest 2]: the estimates that we are going to see now are not very accurate.
[Guest 1]: In fact, since you're talking about the technical part of it,
[Guest 1]: the other technical part of it is that when you rebase,
[Guest 1]: you also present data for the previous years.
[Guest 1]: They didn't do that for two years.
[Unknown]: There's a big question mark.
[Unknown]: There's a big question mark around it.
[Guest 1]: And when they finally did it,
[Guest 1]: it was to reduce the growth from the previous regime
[Guest 1]: and increase the growth from the current regime.
[Guest 1]: It's bound to be suspect.
[Guest 1]: You're bound to suspect it.
[Guest 1]: But that's the gross data, right?
[Guest 1]: But you talk about other data.
[Guest 1]: You talk about consumption data.
[Guest 1]: You talk about employment data.
[Guest 1]: The consumption data was ready.
[Guest 1]: It was released.
[Guest 1]: And then it was pulled back.
[Guest 1]: Inconvenient.
[Guest 1]: And they said that it has been pulled back
[Guest 1]: because it has not been approved by the ministry.
[Guest 1]: But it has never been approved by the ministry before
[Guest 1]: because it was released by the Department of Statistics.
[Guest 1]: When was this?
[Guest 1]: About three years ago.
[Guest 1]: I forget the exact date.
[Guest 2]: Just before the elections.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, so roughly about three years ago.
[Guest 2]: It didn't cut a very good picture.
[Guest 1]: It was pulled back because the data that showed
[Guest 1]: was really, really inconvenient.
[Guest 1]: And the statistician who was in charge of it,
[Guest 1]: the chief statistician at that point resigned.
[Guest 1]: And then along with him, the next guy also resigned.
[Guest 1]: So you've completely destroyed.
[Guest 1]: Then what happened is when it comes to employment data,
[Guest 1]: same problems.
[Guest 1]: As a result, everybody started relying on private data,
[Guest 1]: which is the data released by the CMI,
[Guest 1]: the Center for Monitoring the Indian Economy.
[Guest 1]: Now, when that data is inconvenient,
[Guest 1]: you say, oh, we can't rely on that data
[Guest 1]: because it's private data.
[Guest 1]: So see how this fits in.
[Guest 1]: So there's no data, no official data.
[Guest 1]: If the private data is inconvenient,
[Guest 1]: you say we can't rely on private data.
[Guest 1]: This lays the road open for any narrative
[Guest 1]: because now it's your opinion versus my opinion
[Guest 1]: because there is no data.
[Guest 2]: And what that tells us is that all that matters is opinion.
[Guest 2]: Exactly.
[Guest 2]: I mean, policy needs data.
[Guest 2]: So my bigger worry is that, you know,
[Guest 2]: why do we seek better data?
[Guest 2]: Why are the policymakers not,
[Guest 2]: they should be the ones, you know,
[Guest 2]: louder on this saying we need the data,
[Guest 2]: we need better data because we are, you know, flying blind.
[Guest 1]: So Pooja, I have a question for you,
[Guest 1]: which is, who is the economic policymaker today?
[Guest 2]: Who is an economic policymaker today?
[Guest 2]: Oh, the Prime Minister's office.
[Guest 1]: Right, and who in the Prime Minister's office?
[Guest 1]: I wish I knew.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 1]: This is the problem.
[Guest 1]: You have somebody who's reporting on the economy.
[Guest 1]: Pooja, you have someone like me
[Guest 1]: who's been observing the economy,
[Guest 1]: observing the economy, sometimes casually,
[Guest 1]: sometimes in depth for 50 years.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: I joined an undergrad in economics
[Guest 1]: when I was 16 years old.
[Guest 1]: I'm now going to be 66.
[Guest 1]: 50 years I've been observing the economy.
[Guest 1]: We're both sitting in Delhi
[Guest 1]: and we're saying we don't know
[Guest 1]: who crafts economic policy for the government of India.
[Guest 1]: What can be a bigger indictment of what is happening in this country?
[Guest 1]: When is the last time that you heard an economic policy statement
[Guest 1]: from anybody who wore a title on their badge?
[Guest 2]: We used to hear of turf wars earlier
[Guest 2]: between ministers, between bureaucrats,
[Guest 2]: between the Prime Minister's office
[Guest 2]: and the Finance Minister's office,
[Guest 2]: depending on the politics,
[Guest 2]: or in different governments.
[Guest 2]: We don't hear any of that today
[Guest 2]: because, well, policymaking is not being done in ministry.
[Amit Varma]: Fantastic meta point.
[Amit Varma]: And I was earlier going to double click on the data question
[Amit Varma]: and ask for specifics on, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what kind of data is no longer coming
[Amit Varma]: and why is it no longer coming?
[Amit Varma]: The why is kind of clear.
[Amit Varma]: But instead, I'm going to sort of combine these two themes
[Amit Varma]: and sort of explore this,
[Amit Varma]: that, and this is again sounding like the data and the data,
[Amit Varma]: that there's a very big way in which society has changed
[Amit Varma]: in the last 30 years, beyond economics and beyond India,
[Amit Varma]: which is that 30 years ago,
[Amit Varma]: you could say that there was a broad consensus on the truth.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you had a few mainstream newspaper, mainstream media,
[Amit Varma]: there was a broad consensus on basic aspects of the truth,
[Amit Varma]: that the sun rises in the east and blah, blah, blah, all of those things.
[Amit Varma]: Today, what has happened is one media has become extremely fragmented
[Amit Varma]: and in many ways, that's a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: It's empowered individual creators, it's democratized the space,
[Amit Varma]: you can have more debate, more space for dissent.
[Amit Varma]: But what it's also done is that
[Amit Varma]: because the way we consume information is so fragmented,
[Amit Varma]: and because of the different ways
[Amit Varma]: in which social media has increased tribalism,
[Amit Varma]: what it often means is that there is no consensus on the truth.
[Amit Varma]: You can believe whatever the hell you want.
[Amit Varma]: And this then kind of leads me to one,
[Amit Varma]: one, then I don't know why anyone would suppress data,
[Amit Varma]: because what difference does it make anyway?
[Amit Varma]: But from where you are, one, there is this tendency
[Amit Varma]: that the reality doesn't matter, the narrative matters,
[Amit Varma]: which in politics, I think is clearly true,
[Amit Varma]: up to a point where I think there's,
[Amit Varma]: I am hopeful that there's got to be a tipping point
[Amit Varma]: when the reality has to start to matter.
[Amit Varma]: We didn't see that with demonetization,
[Amit Varma]: and we haven't seen it with COVID.
[Amit Varma]: But as a journalist, as someone who follows the economy,
[Amit Varma]: when you think of data, that fine, all these sources of data
[Amit Varma]: are no longer reliable, but these sources were a few sources,
[Amit Varma]: some of them were government sources.
[Amit Varma]: If you have to think creatively on your feet and say,
[Amit Varma]: look, I want to get to the truth anyway,
[Amit Varma]: what are the kind of proxies that you use?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there is, of course, the anecdotal stuff
[Amit Varma]: that you bring in that, you know, I was in Sitholi,
[Amit Varma]: and this is what I see around me, and that's anecdotal.
[Amit Varma]: But otherwise, if you want to make sense of the world,
[Amit Varma]: you cannot believe anybody because everybody seems to have an agenda.
[Amit Varma]: They're coming from all these places.
[Amit Varma]: You know, we've discussed the state of the media.
[Amit Varma]: What is then your approach to even get at the truth?
[Amit Varma]: And within that, is there a warning to yourself
[Amit Varma]: to fight your own biases?
[Guest 2]: Yes, Amit, you know, 30 years ago, what you say,
[Guest 2]: if there was a consensus, probably because
[Guest 2]: there was very clearly a very dominating side, right?
[Guest 2]: Only the people who got space and whose voices were heard,
[Guest 2]: they got to determine what the truth, so to say, was.
[Guest 2]: We don't know if that was the truth.
[Guest 2]: I mean, you know, it's very difficult for us,
[Guest 2]: for me to, you know, because we've not heard the other side, right?
[Guest 2]: What you're saying, what is happening now is
[Guest 2]: with this democratization of opinion,
[Guest 2]: people stating their opinions,
[Guest 2]: we are getting to hear more and more people
[Guest 2]: who were voiceless earlier.
[Guest 2]: So, I'm not so, I don't have this view that earlier,
[Guest 2]: that if we have a view of what the truth was,
[Guest 2]: I mean, whose truth?
[Guest 2]: You know, that question always is asked.
[Amit Varma]: No, I agree that it's, I actually think it's a net positive.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
[Guest 2]: Usually a net positive.
[Unknown]: But there is then the negative side of it that
[Amit Varma]: the truth almost begins to count for nothing.
[Guest 1]: It's what you want to believe that determines what you believe.
[Guest 1]: But as far as data is concerned, you know,
[Guest 1]: specifically this point of data,
[Guest 1]: like I said, I grew up at a time where you trusted government data, number one.
[Guest 1]: And I still do.
[Guest 1]: I still trust government data.
[Guest 1]: And two, the data was really good.
[Guest 1]: It was released to a timetable, etc.
[Guest 1]: Give us some specifics, like what kind of data would we get,
[Amit Varma]: which we don't get today?
[Amit Varma]: And why don't we get it today?
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Guest 1]: So, like I said, we are not getting consumption data, you know.
[Guest 1]: What is the average household consumption?
[Guest 1]: You know, what is the average household consuming?
[Amit Varma]: That was, that was stopped.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, give me a sense of who collects this and how they collect it.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I just want to kind of really get.
[Guest 1]: I'm not very good at that, but mostly by the Ministry of Statistics and
[Guest 1]: MOSPI as it's called.
[Guest 1]: Then you have the NSO, the National Statistical Organization,
[Guest 1]: which has these periodic surveys, etc, etc.
[Guest 1]: They don't cook up data.
[Guest 1]: The problem is that data releases have stopped.
[Guest 1]: Employment data from the government, consumption data, all of these have stopped.
[Guest 1]: I still trust government data.
[Guest 1]: So, if the government gives you data saying that this is the collection of GST, it's real.
[Guest 1]: I don't think data is being fudged.
[Guest 1]: What is happening in that speaks to the robustness of the statistical system,
[Guest 1]: which is that they've not been able to start fudging that data.
[Guest 1]: But, so there are two questions.
[Guest 1]: There are two questions, so what is the data that I look at and what is the data that I
[Guest 1]: think has problems with it?
[Guest 1]: And this ties up to what she said earlier.
[Guest 1]: So, if the government is not releasing employment data, I am looking at it through the CMIE lens.
[Guest 1]: CMIE has been around as long as I've been around and I've never sensed an agenda.
[Guest 1]: They are thoroughly professional.
[Guest 1]: They have a reputation to defend.
[Guest 1]: They don't have an economic agenda, as far as I know, or political agenda.
[Guest 1]: I trust their data.
[Guest 1]: And you know, you learn to look for continuities or discontinuities in data.
[Guest 1]: When there are discontinuities or the data doesn't square with your view of reality,
[Guest 1]: you're going to question it.
[Guest 1]: I've not seen that.
[Guest 1]: So, when it comes to employment, I look at CMIE data.
[Guest 1]: When it comes to consumption, again, there's some data coming from pyramid studies.
[Guest 1]: There's some data coming from CMIE.
[Guest 1]: There's RBI does a bi-monthly survey of consumer confidence.
[Guest 1]: That is also an index into that.
[Guest 1]: So, you have to look in a more rounded way.
[Guest 1]: When it comes to the meta number, which is GDP, we know that this number is severely flawed.
[Guest 1]: Severely flawed, let's even assume it's not flawed by intent.
[Guest 1]: It is flawed by design, which is as follows.
[Guest 1]: As she said, I can collect data as far as the formal sector is concerned every quarter.
[Guest 1]: Because all the reports that all companies have to submit, so-called formal sector,
[Guest 1]: there's not an exact mapping, but they have to file their returns every quarter,
[Guest 1]: they pay their taxes, etc., etc. A good statistician can take that out
[Guest 1]: and say the formal sector has grown by this much.
[Guest 1]: Now, in the past, what you used to do, surveys, every five years, you surveyed the informal sector.
[Guest 1]: And at the end of that, you said the informal sector can be projected to be X.
[Guest 1]: We know that the formal sector is Y.
[Guest 1]: We know the ratio between these.
[Guest 1]: Now, till we do this survey again, we will assume that the ratio of X to Y remains the same.
[Guest 1]: Fair enough.
[Guest 1]: I think that's a good method.
[Guest 1]: The problem is that the last time you had a major survey of the informal sector was in 2015.
[Guest 1]: It should have been done again in 2020.
[Guest 1]: It was not done.
[Guest 1]: Completely understandable.
[Guest 1]: Because it was COVID, etc., etc. Do it in 2021, you do it in 2022.
[Guest 1]: So, again, I'm not suggesting there's an agenda.
[Guest 1]: Fact is that you couldn't do it.
[Guest 1]: What we also know, which is doubted as a great positive of the various measures
[Guest 1]: taken by the government, is that the economy has got formalized.
[Guest 1]: Right?
[Guest 1]: What does that mean in mathematical terms?
[Guest 1]: It means that the formal sector accounts for a larger percentage of the GDP.
[Guest 1]: Otherwise, you can't say it's formalized.
[Guest 1]: Right?
[Guest 1]: This means that the earlier ratio will not apply any longer.
[Guest 1]: The earlier ratio was, as it so happens, almost exactly 50-50.
[Guest 1]: Which means that the formal sector was as large as the informal sector.
[Guest 1]: So, you roughly multiplied by two.
[Guest 1]: Now, how much has the informal sector shrunk?
[Guest 1]: We know that it's shrunk.
[Guest 1]: It was doubted, not in advance of, but in defense of demonetization.
[Guest 1]: We formalized the economy.
[Guest 1]: It was, again, same situation with GST.
[Guest 1]: In defense of, oh, but this economy has got more formalized.
[Guest 1]: The people who are evading taxes are out of the loop.
[Guest 1]: We know that the pandemic had the same impact because economic activity shrunk.
[Guest 1]: The people with big balance sheets survived.
[Guest 1]: Those who didn't shut down, they're more likely to be from the informal sector,
[Guest 1]: because they're not banked, etc.
[Guest 1]: So, three events within a period of four years have led to the formalization of the economy.
[Guest 1]: So, we know that that 50-50 number cannot be applied any longer.
[Guest 1]: But the GDP numbers that we are using assume that that 50-50 number still applies.
[Guest 1]: Now, you can say, and that's logical, that we don't know what ratio to apply.
[Guest 1]: Should it be 50-50, or 48-52, or 30-70?
[Guest 1]: We don't know.
[Guest 1]: But I am certainly going to question a number which says that GDP is growing at 7%
[Guest 1]: if you're blowing up the formal sector by that number.
[Guest 1]: Now, the SBI, in a recent survey, says the informal sector accounts for only 15% of the economy,
[Guest 1]: from 50%.
[Guest 1]: That sounds wild.
[Guest 1]: It sounds wild to me.
[Guest 1]: I don't believe it at all.
[Guest 1]: What I'm saying is that we don't know the number.
[Guest 1]: And therefore, I have to look at other stuff.
[Guest 1]: But I can certainly say that that 5% growth is bound to be a huge overestimate.
[Guest 1]: And when you combine that with other data that you're getting,
[Guest 1]: because now you're looking for hints, for clues from everywhere.
[Guest 1]: We know from World Bank data, which was analyzed by the World Bank,
[Guest 1]: World Bank data, which was analyzed by Pew in the US,
[Guest 1]: study coincidentally was led by a classmate of mine from college,
[Guest 1]: says that 75 million additional people
[Guest 1]: dropped below the poverty line in the last year and a half or two.
[Guest 1]: You can't have that along with this kind of growth.
[Guest 1]: There would have been some degrowth,
[Guest 1]: even if those people only account for 2% of GDP.
[Guest 1]: But there has been that degrowth.
[Guest 1]: So you're bound to question these numbers.
[Guest 1]: But nobody officially is trying to say,
[Guest 1]: you know, we have to discount this number by such and such.
[Guest 1]: Because as I said, in the absence of data, then narrative becomes everything.
[Guest 1]: We will grow by 10% next year.
[Guest 1]: We will grow by 7% in the long run. Then it's just narrative.
[Guest 2]: Also, I think this is part of a larger shift that's happening globally, which is,
[Guest 2]: you know, like you were saying 30 years ago,
[Guest 2]: nobody questioned the truth because there was consensus,
[Guest 2]: because the truth was determined by the experts, you know, the elites.
[Guest 2]: Now, the whole political movement is anti-elite and anti-experts.
[Guest 2]: Everybody hates anybody who's trained to do something, especially in economics.
[Guest 2]: We like bureaucrats. We love historians.
[Guest 2]: I'm not talking about the RBI governor.
[Guest 2]: I'm talking about people who call themselves economists, but write only on history.
[Guest 2]: But we don't want economists to talk about the economy.
[Guest 2]: We don't trust them.
[Guest 2]: We will trust anybody but an economist to tell us what should the economy be like.
[Guest 2]: For the larger population to feel like this,
[Guest 2]: it is an expression of frustration, not against economists,
[Guest 2]: but against how things have not moved for them as much as they would have liked to,
[Guest 2]: you know, in so many years.
[Guest 2]: People keep discussing about why economists have not delivered
[Guest 2]: because politicians don't listen to them.
[Guest 2]: So, you know, but the thing is that, you know, when you're sort of discrediting experts,
[Guest 2]: you're opening up space for challenging narratives.
[Guest 2]: You are turning economic debates into political debates.
[Guest 2]: And that's how you're sort of trying to play the game of narratives.
[Guest 2]: And therefore, data is not that important.
[Guest 2]: Therefore, data collection is not that important.
[Guest 2]: Therefore, narrative setting is more important.
[Guest 2]: And nobody says, what do you mean when you say formal economy?
[Guest 2]: That question no policymaker, no politician is asking.
[Guest 2]: And people can bring out reports saying the formal sector shrunk without saying
[Guest 2]: what they mean when they say informal economy is shrunk.
[Guest 2]: I mean, I'll give you an example.
[Guest 2]: In 2014, I had done an interview with somebody very senior in the IMF,
[Guest 2]: who said, you know, we're very surprised at how quickly India has exited this grouping
[Guest 2]: of the Fragile Five and all the data and he gave all the credit for it to the UPA government,
[Guest 2]: the last few months of the UPA government and Darbhaiya Govt. Raghuram Rajan.
[Guest 2]: And all the data that he, you know, gave was as on March 31, 2014.
[Guest 2]: So this is before the government changed.
[Guest 2]: This story, you know, made me very popular with when, you know, it was done
[Guest 2]: after the government had changed.
[Guest 2]: It made me very popular with people who now troll me because they thought, you know,
[Guest 2]: because they didn't read the details and they thought, well, you know,
[Guest 2]: it's a change of the government that has brought India out of the Fragile Five.
[Guest 2]: And till today, the popular narrative is that this government has brought India out of
[Guest 2]: out of the grouping of the Fragile Five. But nobody goes back to that story and reads,
[Guest 2]: how did that happen? Who was the IMF talking about when they said that?
[Guest 2]: So, you know, yeah, the truth data doesn't matter.
[Guest 2]: Narrative matters. And so the question that you asked me is, how does,
[Guest 2]: how does a journalist then do their job? Earlier, you know, most of us would only go to the experts.
[Guest 2]: You know, now this is a good thing, I think, because there are some structural changes
[Guest 2]: taking place in the economy after COVID, especially the amount of digitalization
[Guest 2]: that is taking place. Sometimes I'm surprised where, you know.
[Guest 2]: So that is, you know, a huge structural change.
[Guest 2]: Now, it is going to change how we traditionally see the economy, economic growth,
[Guest 2]: formal sector versus informal sector.
[Guest 2]: You know, the experts must be working on this, I'm sure.
[Guest 2]: But my worry is, you know, your narrative sounds very nice when you talk about these things,
[Guest 2]: but what is policy doing to build on this? How are you bringing this into, you know,
[Guest 2]: your policy decisions? Are you equipped to do that? You know, everybody, you know,
[Guest 2]: the decision makers just seem so out of it.
[Guest 1]: Well, you've already answered that, which is that there's nobody that we know who's
[Guest 1]: making policy, you know. So, yeah, but the digitalization is coming.
[Guest 1]: Digitalization is crazy. I realized this last winter.
[Guest 1]: I typically spend a couple of weeks in Bangalore over the winter.
[Guest 1]: And last year, because COVID, I spent longer time.
[Guest 1]: And the guy from whom you buy tender coconut water out near Koramangala accepts Google Pay.
[Guest 1]: I mean, that's really micro payment, right? 30 rupees you pay by Google Pay.
[Guest 1]: And when I spent this year from April to September in our little village,
[Guest 1]: the hardware store, four kilometers away, in a village of 500 people,
[Guest 1]: I found that my wife was doing everything remotely.
[Guest 1]: You don't need cash.
[Guest 1]: She would order the stuff on the phone.
[Guest 1]: The guy would put it onto the bus, which came once a day in the afternoon.
[Guest 1]: It would come on the bus.
[Guest 1]: And of course, this being a little village, it would just be dumped at the bottom of our driveway.
[Guest 1]: And it would be, you know, it's not going to go.
[Guest 1]: We'll pick it up in the evening.
[Guest 1]: And the bill would come along with the consignment and she'd transfer it by Google Pay.
[Guest 1]: So, it's fantastic.
[Guest 1]: But, like my sense is that this is a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: But has the end come closer with the wrong means?
[Amit Varma]: I don't think that this particular end has to do with demands or any of that.
[Amit Varma]: It's just a natural flow that could have happened.
[Guest 2]: Covid, I think it's because of the shock of Covid.
[Guest 2]: I also feel that, you know, I'm all right if somebody wants to take credit for it.
[Guest 2]: That's all right.
[Guest 2]: What matters is that something good happened.
[Guest 2]: But when something good happened, beyond using it to nourish your narrative,
[Guest 2]: why not actually study it and, you know, be more, you know, have a more robust response to the change.
[Guest 2]: Which you've already answered that.
[Guest 1]: Because if you want to study it, you need experts.
[Guest 1]: And you think experts are the last people you want to listen to.
[Guest 2]: So, you're sort of shooting yourself in the foot.
[Guest 2]: My other question is kind of about mindset.
[Amit Varma]: Like we were talking about formal and informal.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I just want to dwell on this particular issue of, you know,
[Guest 1]: I just want to dwell on this particular issue of who's making economic policy.
[Guest 1]: And it's a broader issue.
[Guest 1]: I have a very dear friend who was chief executive of a very large chemical company.
[Guest 1]: And in the process of his work, both as an individual CEO, as well as being on the industry
[Guest 1]: body and therefore lobbying.
[Guest 1]: And, you know, he became very friendly with a particular secretary to the government of India.
[Guest 1]: And they began talking about policy.
[Guest 1]: This guy said to me, you know, when I have to write a note on policy, it doesn't go to my minister.
[Guest 1]: It goes to the PMO.
[Guest 1]: It goes on a blank piece of paper.
[Guest 1]: It's not on my official email.
[Guest 1]: It's not on a letterhead.
[Guest 1]: Who reads it in the PMO?
[Guest 1]: I don't know.
[Guest 2]: What language do they use?
[Guest 2]: Wait, wait, wait, wait.
[Guest 1]: It goes to the PMO.
[Guest 1]: It goes to the PMO, it comes back with notes scribbled on it, uninitialed.
[Guest 1]: I don't know whose notes there are.
[Guest 1]: Now I incorporate those notes into my policy.
[Guest 1]: Now it goes through the official channels.
[Guest 1]: So that if there was any mistake incorporated into the new policy, they'll say, but this
[Guest 1]: came from the ministry.
[Guest 1]: A secretary to the government of India does not know who is reading his policy suggestions
[Guest 1]: and telling him what to do.
[Guest 1]: So this is not just about economics.
[Guest 1]: It's across the board.
[Guest 1]: It's a black box in which policy is being made.
[Amit Varma]: A black hole, rather.
[Amit Varma]: You can open up a black box and figure out what happened.
[Amit Varma]: So the question I was coming to is, you know, you mentioned informal, informal, formal,
[Amit Varma]: informal, and we'll kind of, we can double click on that later and go into that in some
[Amit Varma]: detail.
[Amit Varma]: But at a meta level, it, you know, I've always felt that the way that issue, the way that
[Amit Varma]: is framed is to me wrong, that people in the informal sector are doing something sinful,
[Amit Varma]: they're evading tax, blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: And I just feel that's wrong.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the informal sector is informal because it's been forced to be there because
[Amit Varma]: the heavy hand of the law is just, you know, so oppressive that sometimes you don't have
[Amit Varma]: a choice.
[Amit Varma]: You just, you're in the informal sector, you're outside the system.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, you're very small and all of that, all those things come into play.
[Amit Varma]: Now, it seems to me that at some level that there is sort of this mindset within the government
[Amit Varma]: that informal ko formal banana hai, number one, so we know exactly what's happening and
[Amit Varma]: everything is in the clear light of day and make it formal not by removing all these restrictions
[Amit Varma]: and by enabling ease of business, which allows them to come into the light, but through all
[Amit Varma]: these different ways.
[Amit Varma]: And secondly, one of the key metrics when people talk about how well the economy is
[Amit Varma]: doing seems to be tax collections.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't understand why that should be a metric because tax collections to me, let
[Amit Varma]: me finish my question.
[Amit Varma]: So tax collections to me are and sort of a transfer from the productive part of the economy
[Amit Varma]: to the parasitic part of the economy.
[Amit Varma]: So I don't know why that should be a metric.
[Amit Varma]: But my question, therefore, is that, you know, in 91, it seemed that a fundamental mindset
[Amit Varma]: shift that kind of happened, where policymakers figured out that we need to get out of the
[Amit Varma]: way, people are smart, they'll take care of themselves.
[Amit Varma]: You know, voluntary interactions will kick in, it's a positive sum game.
[Amit Varma]: That seems to, if it was there at all, in any serious way, it kind of seems to have
[Amit Varma]: sort of disappeared, where we still have the central planning mindset, and we want to control
[Amit Varma]: everything, not just, and if we can't control reality, we'll control the narrative.
[Amit Varma]: So I know I'm rambling a bit.
[Guest 1]: I have a few reactions to that.
[Guest 1]: Firstly, you know, where I come from, in terms of my economic ideologies, exactly as you
[Guest 1]: do, it's not just parasitic.
[Guest 1]: It's also, you know, as Ajay Shah talked about in his book and on your podcast, it
[Guest 1]: has been demonstrated that revenue in the hands of government is one third as efficient
[Guest 1]: as revenue in the hands of the private person, right?
[Guest 1]: So it's, yeah, so it's not just parasitic, it's grossly inefficient.
[Guest 1]: But to me, the even bigger problem, aside from inefficiency and so on and so forth,
[Guest 1]: is the fact that 85% of the employment is in the informal sector.
[Guest 1]: So when you start bashing the informal sector, first through demonetization, then through
[Guest 1]: GST, then through pandemic, you're rendering vast swathes of the population unproductive.
[Guest 1]: You're putting them out of work.
[Guest 1]: You're taking money off their tables.
[Guest 1]: And to some extent, then you're trying to replace it with these grand gestures of
[Guest 1]: princely munificence, which it isn't.
[Guest 1]: But you're taking away the dignity of people who were able to feed their families yesterday
[Guest 1]: and they can't today.
[Guest 1]: And we are about the lowest labor participation rate in the world is in India.
[Guest 1]: Of adults between 80 and 65, what percentage of people take part in the economy?
[Guest 1]: India is about the lowest in the world at 40%.
[Guest 1]: It was 42 before COVID hit.
[Guest 1]: It went down to like 36 now.
[Guest 1]: It's still below 40.
[Guest 1]: So if you don't grow, either you find a way to formalize and grow so rapidly, you have
[Guest 1]: GDP growth rates of 10 and 12%, like China had for 30 years.
[Guest 1]: There's a different story.
[Guest 1]: You neither have that, nor do you ally the informal sector.
[Guest 1]: You've got, and these are the longer term issues that worry me even more, that you are
[Guest 1]: having, you know, she talked about a lost decade.
[Guest 1]: My worry is about lost generations of young people.
[Guest 1]: And I see those people.
[Guest 1]: These are not just statistics for me.
[Guest 1]: I understand statistics.
[Guest 1]: I look at them carefully.
[Guest 1]: I'm trained to look at them.
[Guest 1]: But I see the people.
[Guest 1]: These are 35 year old men whom I first interacted with when they were three and four and five
[Guest 1]: years old.
[Guest 1]: And I saw the hopes with which their parents, who were my neighbors, perhaps my employees,
[Guest 1]: with which they put them into schooling and how they emerged with no hope.
[Guest 1]: Two things let them down, and the two are intimately related.
[Guest 1]: Because is education supply-led or demand-led?
[Guest 1]: You know, we've talked about it often.
[Guest 1]: You believe it's demand-led.
[Guest 1]: To some extent, I agree.
[Guest 1]: Not fully.
[Guest 1]: We differ on that.
[Guest 1]: But on the demand side, if there's no employment being created, your incentive to pursue high
[Guest 1]: quality education vanishes.
[Guest 1]: And that's certainly the case.
[Guest 1]: All these young men are either unemployed or underemployed, and I'm seeing them.
[Guest 1]: I saw them when they were five, I saw them 16, I saw them when they were 20, they're
[Guest 1]: now in their 30s.
[Guest 1]: And when you speak of lost generations, the point is that losing generations at this point
[Amit Varma]: in time, when we are having this demographic movement where what was a demographic dividend
[Amit Varma]: is becoming a demographic disaster is even worse.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Guest 2]: Also, you know, there's more fundamental thing, an increase in GST collections may not necessarily
[Guest 2]: be an indicator of growing GDP.
[Guest 2]: It could probably just be that companies have, you know, raised their selling price.
[Guest 2]: I mean, somebody needs to study that and, you know, decipher the data for us.
[Guest 2]: And, you know, the other thing is that, you know,
[Guest 1]: Don't find that data very clear, which is that the increase in GST over the last two
[Guest 1]: years is barely more than what inflation has been.
[Guest 1]: So in real terms, it's not great.
[Amit Varma]: Regardless, yes.
[Guest 2]: Yeah.
[Guest 2]: And the other thing is that, so, you know, multiple things happen and it, which is why,
[Guest 2]: you know, it's very difficult sometimes, even for the experts, people are trained to do
[Guest 2]: it to understand what goes on in the economy.
[Guest 2]: And, you know, there's all this oversimplification in the narrative that happens is very, very
[Guest 2]: harmful because of that.
[Guest 2]: Like, for instance, for years, there was this whole politics around FDI and retail.
[Guest 2]: Now, Amazon is this much hated big company, and we have cabinet ministers who have declared
[Guest 2]: the Quit India movement, you know, and, but, well, the only sector in which employment
[Guest 2]: generation is happening as of today is the online retail sector.
[Guest 2]: And it is not happening, and which is also leading to formalization.
[Guest 2]: All of your small shops, you know, around you have all tied into Amazon.
[Guest 2]: You would have also seen this happening.
[Guest 2]: And, you know, their business is growing and it's a win-win at the moment.
[Guest 2]: Since Amazon is such a large company, it has such a bad reputation globally.
[Guest 2]: We don't know if this, you know, equation will remain win-win, but that's where the
[Guest 2]: role of policy and regulation comes in.
[Guest 2]: But so far, it has happened organically on its own because the market forces are operating.
[Guest 2]: And it is happening in almost opposite of what the concerns of the politicians for years
[Guest 2]: have been.
[Guest 2]: And all the support they mobilized from exactly these people, you know, saying that Amazon
[Guest 2]: is your, I mean, whatever, Western retail giants are your biggest enemies.
[Guest 2]: My point is that, you know, this could have happened sooner.
[Guest 2]: It could have happened in a more regulated way.
[Guest 2]: It can happen in wider parts of the country if policymakers were taking better, well-informed
[Guest 2]: decisions and not simply doing politics.
[Guest 2]: I think almost always on the basis of not even understanding what they're talking about.
[Guest 2]: This is a big example of it.
[Guest 2]: And, you know, this is what to me is most worrying.
[Guest 2]: To me, what is more, you want to do a narrative, you want to do your politics.
[Guest 2]: That's all right.
[Guest 2]: As long as, you know, deep in your ministries, you were doing your policymaking, you know,
[Guest 2]: like policy wonks and getting, you know, applying your minds to these things.
[Guest 2]: We don't see any evidence of that.
[Guest 2]: And to me, that is more worrying, you know, not the polarization and not everything.
[Guest 2]: Because why is it so easy to polarize?
[Guest 2]: Why is it easy to do politics all the time and mislead people?
[Guest 2]: Because that's all that, you know, goes on.
[Guest 2]: People don't see the truth because, you know, you're not doing policymaking.
[Amit Varma]: I love the phrase you just used, deep in your ministries.
[Amit Varma]: That sounds like the kind of phrase like China Meevil or a fantasy fiction writer,
[Amit Varma]: deep in your ministries, kind of.
[Guest 1]: Or even Brave New World.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: All suitably dystopian.
[Guest 2]: So that, you know, that comes from how the non-bloc is organized, you know, who sits
[Guest 2]: on the ground floor, you know, who are the people who sit closer to the minister's office.
[Guest 2]: So, yeah, unconsciously, I think that's what I'm talking about.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: It's a very resonant phrase, you know, deep in your ministries.
[Amit Varma]: You could have.
[Guest 1]: I've never had the privilege of.
[Amit Varma]: Not these ministries, but I'm imagining, like, I remember when I first came to Bombay,
[Amit Varma]: I was obviously blown away by the scale of it because I'd never been in such a big city.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember going to Dadar station and it took me half an hour just to find the correct
[Amit Varma]: platform because Dadar station is where all the different lines, harbor line, central line,
[Amit Varma]: which they all kind of converge.
[Amit Varma]: And it was like being inside this giant video game.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you remember the video games of the 90s, Prince and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: You're navigating on those or Wolfenstein.
[Amit Varma]: And it was like being in this giant video game.
[Amit Varma]: And I thought a video game set in Dadar would be so incredible with this labyrinthine and
[Amit Varma]: multi-level shit happening all over the place.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, those forms of people.
[Guest 2]: You should visit finance ministry some point in time.
[Unknown]: That's what you made it sound like.
[Unknown]: Yeah, yeah, it is.
[Guest 2]: There is a basement, you know, where there are these documents, which I don't think anybody's
[Unknown]: touched for a million years.
[Guest 2]: You know, there's a sort of kind of a courtyard in the center, on the top floors, you know,
[Guest 2]: all the section officers.
[Unknown]: It's, somebody should write about it, actually.
[Guest 2]: Since we are talking about this, this is not related to our conversation.
[Guest 2]: But an interesting thing is that Lord Mountbatten's office is in finance ministry still.
[Guest 2]: There is a plaque that, you know, where the CBDD chairman sits.
[Guest 2]: So it says the, what was he?
[Guest 2]: The Supreme Commander of the Second World War.
[Guest 2]: That is the office and the balcony sometimes opened, you know, where he used to sit and
[Guest 2]: look at the Viceroy's, this thing.
[Amit Varma]: So his ghost is there.
[Guest 2]: It's all over India now.
[Unknown]: Mountbatten's office still existing in North York reminds me of, reminds me of CCA.
[Amit Varma]: You must be knowing about CCA, right?
[Amit Varma]: CCA?
[Amit Varma]: Okay, let me tell you about CCA.
[Amit Varma]: So sometime in the 1980s, and to give credit where credit is due, I think Vivek Debroy
[Amit Varma]: first wrote about this in one of his books.
[Amit Varma]: So sometime in the 1980s, a department in the Tamil Nadu ministry called the CCA, this
[Amit Varma]: gentleman in the Tamil Nadu ministry, who was part of this department called the CCA,
[Amit Varma]: they apply for a raise in their budgets.
[Amit Varma]: So when it goes to whatever committee looks into these things, they decide to look into
[Amit Varma]: ki ye, what is the CCA?
[Amit Varma]: Hai kya?
[Amit Varma]: What do they do?
[Amit Varma]: So here's the history of the CCA, that the Second World War breaks out, we have to go
[Amit Varma]: back to that period.
[Amit Varma]: The Second World War breaks out.
[Amit Varma]: And part of the result of the Second World War breaking out is that trade routes between
[Amit Varma]: Cuba and England are broken.
[Amit Varma]: Now, Winston Churchill, you know, who is at the helm of the English effort to save the
[Amit Varma]: Western world, which he successfully manages, loves cigars.
[Amit Varma]: And the best cigars in the world, according to him, are from Cuba, he can no longer get
[Amit Varma]: them.
[Amit Varma]: The second best cigars in the world are from Trichinarapalli or whatever, it's from Tamil
[Amit Varma]: Nadu.
[Amit Varma]: So a department is set up in the imperial ministry called CCA, Churchill Cigar Assistant.
[Unknown]: Wow, I didn't know that.
[Amit Varma]: And the World War ends, and India becomes independent, and Churchill dies, and decades
[Amit Varma]: pass.
[Amit Varma]: And that department still is getting a budget, is still running until someday some mad moron
[Amit Varma]: within that department decides to apply for an increase in the budget.
[Guest 2]: So this is what, Amit, governments have always functioned like this.
[Guest 2]: This is just a difference in degree, you know, like what you're saying.
[Guest 2]: I also recognize that these problems go beyond the last, you know, decade.
[Guest 2]: It's just the slide, you know, has just sort of really become really quick paced and worse
[Guest 2]: now.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, you know, I mean, people think, you know, when budget is made, you know, officials
[Guest 2]: must be sitting looking at every entry, you know, how much is this department getting?
[Guest 2]: You know, it's, it's not like that.
[Guest 2]: What they'll do is they'll just take all the heads, apply a certain, you know, increase
[Guest 2]: multiplier, that it doesn't even get discussed, you know, these things are like, sometimes
[Guest 2]: done really on the tips of their fingers.
[Amit Varma]: And also, you know, all of this Mountbatten's office in North Bloc, or the CCA in the government
[Amit Varma]: seem to me like metaphorically true for mindsets as well, that we stay tied to old mindsets
[Amit Varma]: of the past, and don't change to recognize new realities, which is incredibly important,
[Amit Varma]: especially in modern times where reality itself is changing so fast, the economy is changing
[Amit Varma]: so fast.
[Guest 2]: The whole discussion we had last time I came to your show on Pranam Mukherjee taking finance
[Guest 2]: mystery backwards, we are seeing that with Atmanirbhar and, you know, the trade policy
[Guest 2]: and so many other things, you know, the return of the inspector Raj when these rules have
[Guest 2]: come out for e-commerce, you know, how government officials can ask questions, everything is
[Guest 2]: regressing back to the pre 1991 sort of mindset, because that is so deeply embedded into the
[Guest 2]: way rules and regulations are written, shaping how bureaucrats think, shaping how politicians
[Guest 2]: think 1991 happened.
[Guest 2]: But, you know, everybody says that, you know, what it did is they forged a new consensus.
[Guest 2]: And after that, the speed of change in policy, modernization of policy may have varied.
[Guest 2]: But big, big thing that was one was that across political shades, there was consensus that
[Guest 2]: this is the direction we will move in.
[Guest 2]: I'm not so sure that, you know, there is that consensus anymore, if it was even in the first
[Amit Varma]: place.
[Amit Varma]: It's there's almost a poignant note in this that Ajay Shah, who's been on the show and
[Amit Varma]: has written a great book in service of the Republic, one of the essential books in the
[Amit Varma]: Indian economy, along with another one we'll talk about soon, once came on the show, it
[Amit Varma]: was very poignant.
[Amit Varma]: And he said that the reason I wrote that book, the reason I wrote that book is because there
[Amit Varma]: were a certain number of people within government, within the policy circles, within whatever,
[Amit Varma]: who were looking ahead, who, you know, had discarded the dogmas of the past and looking
[Amit Varma]: ahead and wanted to make things better.
[Amit Varma]: And those people were dying out.
[Amit Varma]: And he said, I want to leave something for the next generation.
[Amit Varma]: I want to leave something so that there can be more of us and more to this.
[Amit Varma]: And I found it very inspiring and sad at the same time.
[Amit Varma]: Some were dying, some were eased out.
[Amit Varma]: It's interesting, like there is that old phrase that paradigms change one death at a time.
[Amit Varma]: So you can't change minds, people change and a younger generation will do things differently.
[Amit Varma]: Except that that hasn't happened, that there was a temporary moment of change.
[Amit Varma]: And the people who believed in that change are kind of gone.
[Guest 1]: But it's also true, though, of course, is a much debated issue, whether how much we
[Guest 1]: believed in that change and how much it was forced upon us by circumstances, by a fiscal
[Guest 1]: crisis, by a foreign exchange crisis, by the fact that we needed to tap into international
[Guest 1]: loans and a lot of policy changes were forced on us by that.
[Guest 2]: But I agree, you know, with Mantek Singhalwalia, when he says that it just wasn't sold.
[Guest 2]: You see, people are not opposed to change.
[Guest 2]: People like we just discussed, people are willing to move into digital forms of payment,
[Guest 2]: for instance.
[Guest 2]: So when it comes to technology, which makes their lives easier because it's so easy to
[Guest 2]: demonstrate it, people are very open to change.
[Guest 2]: If they're not open to change in wonky policies, it's because it has not been explained to
[Guest 2]: them how it is good for them.
[Guest 2]: And that is the failure of the politicians.
[Guest 1]: The farm law is a clear example, right?
[Guest 1]: Yeah, yeah.
[Guest 1]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: You know, people from our side of the fence, meaning who believe that the role of a government
[Guest 1]: needs to be limited, that subsidies need to be limited, etc.
[Amit Varma]: Farmers need to be empowered with choice.
[Guest 1]: Not just that.
[Guest 1]: That there's several levels, there's several layers of them.
[Guest 1]: And one of those layers is that it was decided at the time of the Constitution that agriculture
[Guest 1]: should basically be a state subject.
[Guest 1]: This MSP is not attainable in the long run.
[Guest 1]: We've just accumulated so much dead stock.
[Guest 1]: The fact that it has to go is a given, but it needs to be negotiated.
[Guest 1]: It was not negotiated.
[Guest 1]: Now you've got this huge political impasse sitting over there.
[Guest 1]: And because that impasse has become so, so intractable, you have this horrendous spectacle
[Guest 1]: of a cavalcade, which is mustered by a central minister's son, mowing down innocent farmers.
[Guest 1]: It's only because of that.
[Guest 1]: It's because you created an impasse.
[Guest 1]: This should, as a policy wonk, I'm the first person to say that agriculture needs to be
[Guest 1]: reformed.
[Guest 1]: Agricultural policy needs to be reformed.
[Guest 1]: But it's got to be political.
[Guest 1]: It's got to be negotiated.
[Guest 1]: It was just announced one day.
[Guest 1]: You see the difference between narrative and actually consensus building?
[Guest 2]: In fact, I did an episode on the farm laws with Ajay and we both agreed, obviously, with
[Amit Varma]: everything that you're saying, that that is a tragedy.
[Amit Varma]: But you could change a couple of things about the farm laws, but economically, it's fine.
[Amit Varma]: It's great.
[Amit Varma]: It's a move in the right direction.
[Amit Varma]: But the politics is disastrous.
[Amit Varma]: It's just tearing us apart.
[Amit Varma]: It's disastrous.
[Amit Varma]: And it's so ironic because typically what politicians excel at is getting the politics
[Amit Varma]: right and the economics wrong.
[Amit Varma]: And this is practically, literally the opposite.
[Amit Varma]: I'm making two points.
[Guest 1]: One is this one, which I agree with 100%.
[Guest 1]: The other is that when it comes to agriculture, because the agricultural scenario is so different
[Guest 1]: in different parts of the country, you can't have one policy.
[Guest 1]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: Needs much deeper study.
[Guest 1]: For example, I would say, top down, first principles, which is that the government should
[Guest 1]: have no role as far as agricultural markets is concerned.
[Guest 1]: A very simple statement to make.
[Guest 1]: Now, this agricultural model bill was talked about 2003 or something like that, right?
[Guest 1]: Only one state, the last state on earth you would expect, which is Bihar, took one major
[Guest 1]: element of it and they said, no government mandis any longer.
[Guest 1]: From a theoretical point of view, great.
[Guest 1]: What did it result in?
[Guest 1]: It resulted in a lowering of average price for farmers in Bihar, because a lot of mandis
[Guest 1]: wound up.
[Guest 1]: And so now the average distance from the farmer to the mandi went up, access to markets went
[Guest 1]: down.
[Guest 1]: You had two things.
[Guest 1]: One is the average price came down.
[Guest 1]: Secondly, the scatter in price went up, because those who were further got lower prices.
[Guest 1]: Those who were closer got better prices.
[Guest 1]: Now, I can still say, that's how it should be.
[Guest 1]: If your farm is not located close enough to markets, you should get a lower price.
[Guest 1]: You shouldn't be farming there.
[Guest 1]: I can say that.
[Guest 1]: Then this leads to another question.
[Guest 1]: Why are the farmers in that situation?
[Guest 1]: They're in that situation because there's no industry in Bihar.
[Amit Varma]: And you're not allowed to sell agricultural land anyway for non-agricultural land.
[Guest 1]: So when you have a mess at every level, who should carry the burden for it?
[Guest 1]: You've ended up in a situation where the poorest people are carrying the burden, which is the
[Guest 1]: small farmer.
[Guest 1]: So from first principles, I can say good thing.
[Guest 1]: But when you actually see the misery on the ground, you have to say, look, there's got
[Guest 1]: to be negotiated.
[Guest 1]: Anybody, you need to create an exit policy for them.
[Guest 1]: So you can't do this by railroading a law through and look at the mess in Rajya Sabha.
[Guest 1]: The voice vote, people are saying, and there is confusion about whether the, look how messy
[Guest 1]: it was.
[Guest 1]: Were the Rajya Sabha MPs in their chair or not?
[Guest 1]: Were they allowed to vote or not?
[Guest 1]: This is not the kind of stuff which you should be debating, right?
[Guest 1]: Procedures should be clean, transparent.
[Guest 1]: It shouldn't even come to that.
[Guest 1]: At a meta level, major bills, which have been negotiated in Parliament in the last UPA government,
[Guest 1]: something like 46% of bills were sent to expert committees.
[Guest 1]: Sent to expert committees.
[Guest 1]: Earlier on, it was as high as 70.
[Guest 1]: In this Rajya Sabha, 11% of bills were sent to expert committee, which is a larger point,
[Guest 2]: not just economics, across the board.
[Guest 2]: I know best.
[Guest 2]: That's the whole approach.
[Guest 1]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: So there is no space for debate.
[Guest 1]: There is no reason to have experts.
[Guest 1]: It has been decided, Parliament doesn't exist, right?
[Amit Varma]: In terms of what it's supposed to do.
[Amit Varma]: You can run it from an Excel sheet, because anti-defection law, you decide how each MP votes.
[Amit Varma]: It's like shifting from one equilibrium to another.
[Amit Varma]: We can agree on what the ideal state of things should be where you empower farmers with choice,
[Amit Varma]: you don't have the government playing a part and creating its monopolies and being the middleman.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is, how do you get there from here?
[Amit Varma]: And there is a massive transaction cost, if I might misuse that term,
[Amit Varma]: and the poor kind of bear it.
[Amit Varma]: So the best way to do it is in gradual steps and let the states
[Amit Varma]: experiment and let the states kind of take that.
[Amit Varma]: So I kind of agree with all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, we've sort of, we'll take a commercial break now.
[Amit Varma]: And after we come back, like the way I'd, you know, originally,
[Amit Varma]: Pooja will remember I'd emailed her at the start of the year.
[Amit Varma]: And I said, let's do a three way episode like Ajay Shah four way.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, me and three guests, which is Pooja, Ajay Shah and Shruti.
[Amit Varma]: And we'll just speak about the Indian economy, zooming in all the way.
[Amit Varma]: So first, we talk about the post-independence to 91.
[Amit Varma]: Then we zoom into 91 to 2011.
[Amit Varma]: Then we zoom into the phrase made famous by Pooja's great book, The Lost Decade.
[Amit Varma]: And then we zoom into the current moment and look at where we are.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting thing is, in between, Shruti with Mercatus started the 1991 project
[Amit Varma]: that they have about, you know, what life was like pre and post liberalization.
[Amit Varma]: So I did an episode leading up to 91 with Shruti and Ajay.
[Amit Varma]: So what I want to do after the break is actually ask Pooja again, though we've done an episode
[Amit Varma]: on this and I'll link that, but ask Pooja again to kind of take us through the last
[Amit Varma]: decade and then come to the present moment and start talking brass tacks, including how
[Amit Varma]: things were before COVID and how COVID has affected that and how things kind of look.
[Amit Varma]: And by the way, for, you know, those of you who are interested in sort of a deeper dive
[Amit Varma]: into all of what we just spoke about, what Mohit was chatting about, I've got a bunch
[Amit Varma]: of episodes on agriculture that I'll link from the show notes and earlier episodes with
[Amit Varma]: Mohit also where, you know, you would have touched upon similar themes.
[Amit Varma]: But first, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Well, that phase in my life ended for various reasons.
[Amit Varma]: And now it is time to revive it.
[Amit Varma]: Only now I'm doing it through a newsletter.
[Amit Varma]: I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com where I will write
[Amit Varma]: regularly about whatever catches my fancy.
[Amit Varma]: I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else.
[Amit Varma]: So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe.
[Amit Varma]: It is free.
[Amit Varma]: Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to go anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So subscribe now for free.
[Amit Varma]: The India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: And nothing after it matters.
[Amit Varma]: Everything is Nehru's fault.
[Amit Varma]: And there's another side that believes the opposite, that history began at 2014.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, nothing that happened before that should be counted.
[Amit Varma]: And everything that is going wrong is Modi's fault.
[Amit Varma]: And where your book works so wonderfully, it shows that the truth is much more complex
[Amit Varma]: than that, that things started going wrong much earlier, that, you know, the culpability
[Amit Varma]: lies with various combination of circumstances and people really.
[Amit Varma]: And there's just this larger narrative playing out there.
[Amit Varma]: So again, we've done a great episode on this, which I'll direct listeners to.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, for that reason, we won't talk about it for two hours.
[Amit Varma]: Like, I think we must have then.
[Amit Varma]: But tell me essentially, you know, what is the narrative?
[Amit Varma]: What what is the last decade?
[Amit Varma]: Why do you call it the last decade?
[Amit Varma]: And what are the key events that kind of set it off?
[Guest 2]: Yeah, Amit, what you're saying is absolutely right.
[Guest 2]: Just like we are saying experts are not heard now.
[Guest 2]: Their views are not taken into account.
[Guest 2]: Technocrats are unimportant.
[Guest 2]: Well, you had the most distinguished economist India's ever had, Dr. Manmohan Singh as prime
[Guest 2]: minister in the previous government, you know, were his views taken on board on economic
[Unknown]: important economic policy matters.
[Guest 2]: So really, there's no difference between, you know, the previous government and this
[Guest 2]: government.
[Guest 2]: And therefore, I don't understand this polarization.
[Guest 2]: I don't understand people who defend the previous government.
[Guest 2]: And I don't understand people who say this government is any great because you're doing
[Guest 2]: the same thing.
[Guest 2]: You don't want to listen, you know, to people who know about things.
[Guest 2]: And that's why we've had a lost decade.
[Guest 2]: You know, problems in the economy may have started before 2008, which is where my book
[Guest 2]: starts.
[Guest 2]: But I began to record it in 2008, with the shock of the global financial crisis, before
[Guest 2]: which the global economy was booming, and therefore the Indian economy was booming because
[Guest 2]: of the kind of links between the Indian economy and the global economy.
[Guest 2]: And what the shock did is that, you know, it was not as severe for India, number one,
[Guest 2]: because India did not have a financial collapse like the Western world did.
[Guest 2]: But also because whatever response and crisis management to make sure that there's no
[Guest 2]: financial collapse, the experts were allowed that that's that one exceptional occasion
[Guest 2]: where experts were allowed to take those decisions.
[Guest 2]: And the economy, there was a dip in growth and the economy bounced back.
[Guest 2]: Some politics happened, some things happened, which were beyond control, such as the Mumbai
[Guest 2]: terror attacks and Prime Minister Manmohan Singh's health, which took him out of office
[Guest 2]: for a while.
[Guest 2]: And the terror attacks led to a change in portfolios, Pranam Mukherjee became the finance
[Guest 2]: minister. As I was saying earlier, he comes from a certain ideological background.
[Guest 2]: He was somebody in this government who could do things in defiance of what the Prime
[Guest 2]: Minister would have liked.
[Guest 2]: The Prime Minister's personality was such that, you know, he wouldn't instruct the
[Guest 2]: finance minister to do things in the way he would want them done.
[Guest 2]: And therefore, some very incorrect policy decisions were taken.
[Guest 2]: Fiscal stimulus that should have been ended was not ended.
[Guest 2]: Banks were instructed to be very liberal in giving loans, whatever loans, loan defaults
[Guest 2]: were taking place because of changes in calculations because of the global, you know,
[Guest 2]: the collapse in global demand because of the global economic crisis.
[Guest 2]: Those calculations didn't happen because banks were very willing to extend further
[Guest 2]: loans and evergreen loans to avoid defaults.
[Guest 2]: And so that led to the NPA crisis.
[Guest 2]: There was this whole tax terrorism with Vodafone, which is again, you know, Pranam
[Guest 2]: Mukherjee's decision in defiance of not only Manmohan Singh, but also Sonia Gandhi,
[Guest 2]: as he documents in his own book.
[Guest 2]: And on top of all of that, there was this whole policy paralysis, thanks to a very,
[Guest 2]: very enthusiastic CAG who has since gone quiet and has been apologising for things he
[Guest 2]: said then.
[Guest 2]: And bureaucrats didn't want to take decisions.
[Guest 2]: There was a political crisis in Parliament.
[Guest 2]: There was confusion within the UPA because the Congress had not had a situation where
[Guest 2]: the prime minister and the party president were two different individuals.
[Guest 2]: So as Salman Khurshid has given an interview, had given an interview back then that, you
[Guest 2]: know, they didn't know how to handle this political crisis.
[Guest 2]: And all of that, you know, just meant that the economy, which had recovered from the
[Guest 2]: shock of the global financial crisis, actually could not recover from these self-created,
[Guest 2]: self-inflicted problems.
[Guest 2]: And so when, you know, the global, the second global shock of the taper tantrum from the
[Guest 2]: US came, there was a run on the rupee, there was macroeconomic instability, your current
[Guest 2]: account deficit and fiscal deficit, you know, reached proportions that created a scare that
[Guest 2]: we were going to have a 1991 type balance of payments crisis.
[Guest 2]: India got into the fragile five, which I was earlier talking about.
[Guest 2]: And the recovery was not sustained, the post global financial crisis recovery.
[Guest 2]: And in those situations, the politics played out, government changed, a new prime minister
[Guest 2]: came who everybody had a lot of hope from.
[Guest 2]: Initially, he announced a whole lot of policy initiators, which really sounded good.
[Guest 2]: So, just making India such as an intention to sort of reorient the economy, pull it out
[Guest 2]: of the policy paralysis.
[Guest 2]: But that doesn't, that never happened.
[Guest 2]: At some point, the politics, what do you want to say something?
[Guest 1]: Yeah, I want to say that, you know, this point that India recovered, it was a false recovery,
[Unknown]: right?
[Guest 1]: Because of the second fact that you mentioned, which is evergreening of loans.
[Guest 1]: And so, the NPAs ballooned and so on.
[Guest 1]: In fact, I would say that because of the very, very prompt measures that were taken in the
[Guest 1]: West, the death of companies, the buying over of companies, the speed with which all that
[Guest 1]: happened, set the stage for a recovery.
[Guest 1]: Here, it was all artificial.
[Guest 1]: It was all papered over.
[Guest 2]: Completely.
[Guest 1]: You know, so the recovery was a false recovery.
[Guest 1]: It wasn't a real recovery.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: And so, it was bound to, the chickens were bound to come home to roost.
[Guest 1]: From a structural point of view, I want to go into a few numbers here.
[Guest 1]: I'll try not to be
[Amit Varma]: Before we do that, shall I let her finish?
[Guest 1]: Actually, we should first talk about this and then move to the, yeah.
[Guest 1]: Sure.
[Guest 1]: I just want to cover that period, you know.
[Guest 1]: So, we had got used to a situation for decades where banking problems and debt problems of
[Guest 1]: the government were papered over by inflation.
[Guest 1]: Inflation cures all debt problems, right?
[Guest 1]: Because loans are designated in rupees, which is an artificial measure.
[Guest 1]: So, if prices go up by 20 percent, that rupee is worth 20 percent less, but the amount I
[Guest 1]: owe you doesn't go up by 20 percent.
[Guest 1]: It only goes up by the interest that I'm paying, right?
[Guest 2]: Lenders are punished.
[Guest 1]: So, in the past, we'd been able to deal with all ills by inflation.
[Guest 1]: However, what happened at this point in time was that inflation became intolerable
[Guest 1]: and they had to ramp down on inflation.
[Guest 1]: And therefore, now you had a situation where you couldn't have inflation to solve these
[Guest 1]: problems, and so all of these bank loan problems came home to roost.
[Guest 1]: The usual means that we had for dealing with debt problems vanished from the armory of
[Guest 1]: bankers, of borrowers, and of the government.
[Guest 1]: And so, it came back to bite.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, that's absolutely right.
[Guest 2]: And so, to continue with what I was saying, initially, this government announced what
[Guest 2]: was expected.
[Guest 2]: What more they could have done is, you know, health and education policies, because even
[Guest 2]: the IMF at that point in time was saying that, well, you know, you can every now and then
[Guest 2]: give fiscal stimulus and, you know, create this bounce back.
[Guest 2]: But, you know, there's only so much that will do.
[Guest 2]: For you to have sustained job-creating growth, you need to focus on your education and health
[Guest 2]: policies, and that's where you need to work.
[Guest 2]: That's where you need to work, those kind of reforms.
[Guest 2]: But nobody paid attention to that advice.
[Guest 2]: And soon we found that all the interest, at least in announcements that we were seeing
[Guest 2]: about, you know, cleaning up the banking sector, focusing on manufacturing, land acquisition,
[Guest 2]: cleaning up the land acquisition side, all the reforms related to the factors of production,
[Guest 2]: those intentions did not materialize into concrete gains for the economy.
[Guest 2]: And because the banking crisis was not handled as well and as quickly as it should have been,
[Guest 2]: the economy kept, you know, the upturn in growth that they had inherited, they could
[Guest 2]: not convert it into.
[Guest 2]: And a lot of that upturn was also because oil prices suddenly changed, and that helped.
[Guest 2]: They were very high, globally oil prices corrected, and they could not sort of capitalize on,
[Guest 2]: you know, those things.
[Guest 2]: And even before demonetization, the economy started slowing, demonetization made it worse.
[Guest 2]: We discussed last time and the book discusses there is, you know, I still don't have answers,
[Guest 2]: but what I speculate on why demonetization was thought of, but we can talk about that
[Guest 2]: if you want to later.
[Guest 2]: But so demonetization and a very, very poorly designed GST were further shocks to, you know,
[Guest 2]: especially the informal sector of the economy, which was already sort of suffering one shock
[Guest 2]: after the other.
[Guest 2]: You know, when exports demand went down, the informal side of the economy also suffered
[Guest 2]: because informal workers tend to get employed in these small units, which are linked to
[Guest 2]: the export side.
[Guest 2]: And so we, you know, by the time, and then, you know, farmers also not getting remunerative
[Guest 2]: prices.
[Guest 2]: So your informal workers, your farm labor, your small and marginal farmers, and industry,
[Guest 2]: everybody, you know, was sort of not doing very well, and the economy was not in great
[Guest 2]: health.
[Guest 2]: And if you recall, before the 2019 elections, even companies like Maruti had announced production
[Guest 2]: cuts, because there was no demand in the economy.
[Guest 2]: And at that point, that should have, you know, voters should have forced cost correction,
[Guest 2]: but voters did not force cost correction.
[Guest 2]: And we haven't seen after that, you know, after elections, any significant decision
[Guest 2]: making that would address either the problems that this government had created, or the problems
[Guest 2]: that they had inherited, including the structural problems of the economy, where the kind of
[Guest 2]: economy that was created post 1991, is just not delivering for such a large proportion
[Guest 2]: of the population, even if your GDP numbers look good, because the GDP numbers are drawn
[Guest 2]: from like we discussed earlier, a very small part of the economy, which is, you know, the
[Guest 2]: formal economy.
[Guest 2]: So, we can keep feeling happy that, you know, our GDP is such and such percentage, but how
[Guest 2]: many people's lives is it really representing?
[Guest 2]: And our per capita income levels are very low, and not even right now, not even at the
[Guest 2]: pre-COVID level.
[Guest 2]: So, that's where we are.
[Guest 2]: And, you know, that's what's happened in the last.
[Guest 1]: So, I want to go back to just to emphasize the point that this is not just a pre-2014
[Guest 1]: post-2014 thing.
[Unknown]: You know, I want to go back to that.
[Guest 1]: And I have been trying for the last two or three years to understand what was the nature
[Guest 1]: of that boom that we saw, pre-demonetization, as somebody who gets what you call high frequency
[Guest 1]: data, which means that you're working in a company and you see sales, etc, etc.
[Guest 1]: I saw the slowdown happening in about eight, nine months before demonetization.
[Guest 1]: So, it's not as though demonetization brought it on.
[Guest 1]: It was already coming.
[Guest 1]: Demonetization worsened it a lot.
[Guest 1]: And then I tried digging back further, and I see a few things.
[Guest 1]: Firstly, if you look at the period 2008 to 2013, because all of this false euphoria was
[Guest 1]: generated by papering over loans, etc, etc, there was an injection into the economy.
[Guest 1]: And you had rural wage growth, 2008 to 2013, of 15% per annum.
[Guest 1]: Unprecedented.
[Guest 1]: Unprecedented, in nominal terms, which meant 7% per annum in real terms.
[Guest 1]: Today, it's negative.
[Guest 1]: Okay, now that had an upside and it had a downside.
[Guest 1]: The upside was that it created rural demand, which became the buzzword for every single
[Guest 1]: corporate in India.
[Guest 1]: And it was real.
[Guest 1]: Rural demand is booming.
[Guest 1]: Everybody from Hindustan Lever to Darbar, to everybody said rural demand is booming.
[Guest 1]: It was, because their real wages were going up.
[Guest 1]: The downside of it was that it was achieved largely by MSPs going up.
[Guest 1]: And so, it fed back into higher inflation.
[Guest 1]: And at some point in time, that high inflation became intolerable, and they had to cut back.
[Guest 1]: So, that was the first issue.
[Guest 1]: And since then, what has happened is that if you look at the terms of trade between
[Guest 1]: industry and agriculture, they have deteriorated hugely for agriculture.
[Guest 1]: So, all of those people who are living in rural areas, their purchasing power of goods
[Guest 1]: coming out of the cities has gone down.
[Guest 1]: So, that rural demand has been knocked.
[Guest 1]: We don't know how to bridge that gap, because as we've seen, there's a trade-off.
[Guest 1]: You give them higher remuneration, you create inflation.
[Guest 1]: Now, this is something that we have known since 1980.
[Guest 1]: In 1980, the World Bank published a very influential report, which said that the problems of the
[Guest 1]: agricultural sector cannot be tackled in the agricultural sector alone.
[Guest 1]: You have to move people from the agricultural sector to wage-paying jobs in non-agriculture.
[Guest 1]: And this we've singularly failed to do.
[Guest 1]: You had Make in India.
[Guest 1]: It came from this realization that you've got to create a manufacturing sector.
[Guest 1]: It was the massive flagship program of the government.
[Guest 1]: The first big program they announced, as she said, in 2015.
[Guest 1]: We're now in 2021.
[Guest 1]: It was supposed to be a five-year program.
[Guest 1]: There's been not one report analyzing why it didn't work.
[Guest 1]: The share of manufacturing to GDP in India has come down, rather than going up.
[Guest 1]: It was supposed to go from 17-18% to 25%.
[Guest 1]: Instead, it has gone to 16% or 15.
[Guest 1]: We don't know the number exactly, but it's gone down.
[Guest 1]: There was no analysis of this.
[Guest 1]: The flagship program of the government was never analyzed.
[Guest 1]: You have a think tank.
[Guest 1]: We don't even have a policy commission here.
[Guest 1]: You know, we don't have planning commission.
[Guest 1]: We have a think tank.
[Guest 1]: The think tank has not analyzed the first thing that they thought about.
[Guest 1]: And the seven-year vision.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: Which the prime minister released is no longer talked about.
[Guest 1]: The second point is that if you look at any nation, at least over the last 50 or 60 years,
[Guest 1]: which has moved from being a low-income nation to a middle-income and an advanced economy,
[Guest 1]: has grown on the basis of manufacturing exports.
[Guest 1]: We had a boom in exports for roughly those same four or five years.
[Guest 1]: It vanished.
[Guest 1]: Why?
[Guest 1]: What are the policy implications of that?
[Guest 1]: Not discussed.
[Guest 1]: I can point to three or four reasons, but these are not being discussed.
[Guest 1]: The first is, and this now comes down to politics, which is that you have a measure which is
[Guest 1]: called the REER, which measures the real exchange rate, the real effective exchange rate.
[Guest 1]: Obviously, if your exchange rate, if your currency is weak,
[Guest 1]: that means it's cheaper for people to buy from you.
[Guest 1]: If it's strong, it's more expensive for people.
[Guest 1]: Now, for decades, China was accused of manipulating its exchange rate downwards.
[Guest 1]: It was considered an exchange manipulator.
[Guest 1]: It was on the basis of that that they were able to grow their manufacturing.
[Guest 1]: I'm not suggesting that we should manipulate it, but at least it needs to be discussed, right?
[Guest 1]: Throughout that period of 2005 to 2012, REER was around 105 based on 2005.
[Guest 1]: So, 2005 to 2013, it was around 100, 105.
[Guest 1]: So, we remained as competitive in terms of exports throughout that period.
[Guest 1]: Today, it is 115.
[Guest 1]: Okay, it's not that we have tried to make it less competitive.
[Guest 1]: It has become less competitive due to a variety of reasons.
[Guest 1]: It's something that needs to be discussed, right?
[Guest 1]: It's not being discussed.
[Guest 1]: Why is it not being discussed?
[Guest 1]: I suspect one reason is a very early narrative, which is that we will make the rupee strong.
[Guest 1]: Therefore, you can't make the rupee weak.
[Guest 1]: One rupee equal to one dollar.
[Guest 1]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: So, you can't make the rupee weak.
[Guest 1]: So, your manufacturing doesn't grow.
[Guest 1]: But that's simplistic.
[Guest 1]: That's only one part of it.
[Guest 1]: The other part of it, and finally, it all goes down to politics, Amit,
[Guest 1]: which is you look at economies that export.
[Guest 1]: You may be producing in the hinterland.
[Guest 1]: How cheap is it for you to move your goods from the factory to the port?
[Guest 1]: You look at any exporting nation.
[Guest 1]: 70-80% of their exports go from factory to port by rail.
[Guest 1]: In our case, the percentage of goods going by rail is kept going down.
[Guest 1]: Rail is much cheaper, should be much cheaper.
[Guest 1]: It isn't over here.
[Guest 1]: Why aren't people sending by rail?
[Guest 1]: Number one, your rail systems are inefficient.
[Guest 1]: Number two, pricing terms.
[Guest 1]: Railways are running both freight and passenger.
[Guest 1]: You don't want to raise passenger.
[Guest 1]: You have to run the railway, so you raise freight.
[Guest 1]: So, you are, the politics of passenger traffic is one more component
[Guest 1]: in making your exports uncompetitive.
[Guest 1]: The seen and the unseen.
[Guest 1]: Seen and the unseen.
[Guest 1]: Your ports are inefficient.
[Guest 1]: They're becoming more efficient.
[Guest 1]: Definitely, we've become much more efficient.
[Guest 1]: Point is that you're not living in a static world.
[Guest 1]: You can't compare yourself with what's going on in the world.
[Guest 1]: You can't compare yourself with what you were in 1970.
[Guest 1]: You've got to compare yourself with Vietnam or Bangladesh or Taiwan or whoever they knew.
[Guest 1]: You're not as efficient as them.
[Guest 1]: Number three, what is the cost of your utilities, your electricity?
[Guest 1]: On each of these, you are not competing with what you were or with the next state.
[Guest 1]: You're competing with the rest of the world.
[Guest 1]: These are issues which are not being discussed.
[Guest 1]: And so, you have a situation where your exports are not growing.
[Guest 1]: The real wages of the agricultural sector are going down.
[Guest 1]: Your formal employment.
[Guest 1]: There used to be a period where every 1% increase in GDP resulted in a half percent growth in
[Guest 1]: formal employment.
[Guest 1]: Today, you know what that figure is?
[Guest 1]: 0.1.
[Guest 1]: That means you need to increase GDP by 10% to add to 1% of employment.
[Guest 1]: So, you're not creating formal sector.
[Guest 1]: Now, that also needs to be understood.
[Guest 1]: Why is it happening?
[Guest 1]: I don't know the answer.
[Guest 1]: I know some of the answers for exports.
[Guest 1]: You can point to labor laws.
[Guest 1]: You can.
[Guest 1]: There are also certain discontinuities, which is that if I am going to produce cars, for
[Guest 1]: example, I can't produce cars in a different way from the rest of the world.
[Guest 1]: I can't produce cars in a more employment intensive way.
[Guest 1]: I've got to produce it with the robots because only the robots will give that kind of accuracy.
[Guest 1]: Nobody's going to take a creaking car just because I want to employ more people.
[Guest 1]: But there needs to be in-depth study of this.
[Guest 1]: How do we increase employment in the formal sector?
[Guest 1]: None of these issues are being discussed, but the economy has changed.
[Guest 1]: And it's changed in ways which is making it more and more difficult for us to catch up
[Guest 1]: and to convert that demographic dividend of 15 or 20 years ago into reality rather than
[Guest 1]: the disaster which it is becoming.
[Amit Varma]: So, I want to add a few points to this and then, you know, kind of move on to my next
[Amit Varma]: question.
[Amit Varma]: And one is while you were talking about all this, you know, moving people from agriculture
[Amit Varma]: to sort of wage paid jobs, just to give perspective around 50% of India, you know, give or take
[Amit Varma]: a little bit here and there is dependent on agriculture.
[Amit Varma]: Dependent on agriculture for their sustenance and in developed countries like the US and
[Amit Varma]: Europe, it's a single digit percentage figure.
[Amit Varma]: And what you'd expect a country like India with cheap labor to have really evolved as
[Amit Varma]: you have massive manufacturing like China, Vietnam, etc.
[Amit Varma]: Did people move from agriculture to the manufacturing sector?
[Amit Varma]: And that's how we kind of grow.
[Amit Varma]: And that never happened in a bunch of reasons, like, for example, our labor laws, which hurt
[Amit Varma]: workers more than they help them.
[Amit Varma]: So it was, you know, one of those things I found rather amusing a few months ago when
[Amit Varma]: UP spoke about changing labor laws was so many people jumping suddenly to the defense
[Amit Varma]: of these labor laws as if they actually help labor, you know, going by intention and not
[Amit Varma]: outcome while they have been such a disaster, and so on and so forth, a variety of reasons
[Amit Varma]: on that.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I want to quickly do a Cliff Notes version of the last decade.
[Amit Varma]: And before I get to my next question and make a few things explicit and also come up flippantly
[Amit Varma]: with a couple of sort of conclusions.
[Amit Varma]: And my first flippant conclusion is that Pakistan is responsible for our economic crisis.
[Amit Varma]: And the first act of happenstance that happens in the last decade are the Mumbai terrorist
[Amit Varma]: attacks.
[Amit Varma]: Because at that point, Shivraj Patel is revealed to be a duffer as a Home Minister.
[Amit Varma]: So therefore, it is decided that somebody competent is required there.
[Amit Varma]: And Manmohan Singh says to Chidambaram, who is then Finance Minister and is doing a really
[Amit Varma]: good job of, you know, rebounding from the economic crisis, he tells Chidambaram that
[Amit Varma]: boss, we need a dude in that ministry, so to say, you are my dude, you take home ministry
[Amit Varma]: for a while, we'll put you back later, at which point Sonia Gandhi raises hand and says,
[Amit Varma]: my boy Pranab Mukherjee is going to finance.
[Amit Varma]: Now, Pranab Mukherjee is full on Indira Bhatt from the 70s.
[Amit Varma]: And Indira, of course, destroyed this nation's economy, kept millions in poverty for decades
[Amit Varma]: longer than the I mean, he's a fossil.
[Amit Varma]: He should not be allowed near any position of power or even a utility like a tap or something,
[Amit Varma]: because God knows what damage he will do.
[Amit Varma]: So Pranab comes over, and he shakes up the whole thing.
[Amit Varma]: He does all these things Pooja described so eloquently, the tax terrorism, retrospective
[Amit Varma]: taxation, the whole phone alone schemes, and you know, which kind of exacerbated the situation
[Amit Varma]: that led to today's banking crisis.
[Amit Varma]: And then Manmohan had his health crisis, so he couldn't really fight back.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, it is not a temporary measure.
[Amit Varma]: You know, Pranab stays in the finance ministry for a couple of years, at which point I come
[Amit Varma]: to my second flippant conclusion.
[Amit Varma]: My second flippant conclusion is that Pranab could have been our finance president.
[Amit Varma]: Why do I say that?
[Amit Varma]: Because he would then not have been in the finance ministry.
[Amit Varma]: Doing the damage he did just because of that he could have been our finance president.
[Amit Varma]: So what Manmohan and Chidambaram finally decide is, there is only one way to get rid of him,
[Amit Varma]: make him the president.
[Guest 2]: In which case, you know, biggest culprit is Sonia Gandhi.
[Guest 2]: If she had made Pranab Mukherjee prime minister and Manmohan Singh finance minister,
[Guest 2]: things may have been different.
[Amit Varma]: Pranab Mukherjee could have, you know, been a little more autocratic about, you know,
[Unknown]: he could have been giving orders to Manmohan, which is such a horrifying thought.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Unknown]: So anyway, so this dude becomes president.
[Amit Varma]: Chidambaram has a few months before the 2014 elections, but there's a course correction,
[Amit Varma]: but it's too late, there's not much.
[Amit Varma]: Now, interesting thing.
[Amit Varma]: Modi takes over, Arun Jaitley comes and they all, Jaitley, Chidambaram, their respective
[Amit Varma]: staffs, it's the same ministry.
[Amit Varma]: They get along wonderfully well, there is continuity.
[Amit Varma]: They are, you know, under Jaitley, the finance ministry is doing the similar kind of good
[Guest 2]: work that they did under Chidambaram.
[Guest 2]: The pipeline of policies is being cleared.
[Amit Varma]: Then the next act of happenstance, which is, which leads me to my third flippant conclusion
[Amit Varma]: that India mein suit nahi pehna chahiye, because Modi dresses up in that suit with his name
[Amit Varma]: on it.
[Amit Varma]: And immediately that suit boot ka sarkar jaib goes and he decides ki, you know, I want to
[Amit Varma]: keep the people with me, you know, sabka saath, sabka vikas and all that, but whatever, he
[Amit Varma]: changes course and over a period of time, obviously, it's not the only trigger, but
[Guest 2]: it's one trigger as Pooja pointed out.
[Guest 2]: Kejriwal.
[Amit Varma]: Kejriwal also, but over time, he changes course and then disaster after disaster, including
[Amit Varma]: demonetization, which is Pooja wrote so eloquently in her book, could be because of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: that thing that something has to be done and this will be shown to hit the rich and the
[Amit Varma]: black money people and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And we basically go to hell after that.
[Amit Varma]: Now, two thoughts come to mind.
[Amit Varma]: One is the incredible role of happenstance in all of this.
[Amit Varma]: Ki yaar, if Pakistan had not sent those dudes and all of that, or if our coast guard had
[Amit Varma]: worked a little better, we may not be here today.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: Chidambaram could just have continued and even Shivraj Patil could have continued.
[Amit Varma]: Theek hai.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and his grandson was in college with me.
[Amit Varma]: Anyway, I don't know why that's an irrelevant aside.
[Amit Varma]: And the other sort of, so the role of happenstance is there.
[Amit Varma]: But the other thing that really dismays me, and that speaks to what you were just talking
[Amit Varma]: about, Mohit, is that these decisions seem to be happening because of all the wrong reasons.
[Amit Varma]: Economic decisions are not happening because of economic reasons.
[Amit Varma]: They're happening because of political reasons.
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes they're grand political reasons, like what image Modi wants to project.
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes they're petty political reasons, like Sonia decides ki nahi, finance ministry
[Amit Varma]: mein I want my little bulldog to, you know, run the thing.
[Amit Varma]: And fans of Pranab Da, I won't even say please excuse, you can go to hell.
[Amit Varma]: So that's, you know, is there a solution to that?
[Amit Varma]: Because, you know, I don't want to think that our economic future is dependent on getting
[Amit Varma]: lucky with the politics and the circumstances working out.
[Amit Varma]: Ideally, I would think that there should be a cadre of people, which at one point with
[Amit Varma]: people like Vijay Kelkar and Ajay Shah, whether it seemed that there were, that there are
[Amit Varma]: people who are serious people who are thinking about these things and making decisions.
[Amit Varma]: Is there something like that today?
[Amit Varma]: Or are we essentially dependent on where fortune takes us in terms of what policy we have?
[Guest 1]: We've talked about that earlier, which is that this government is anti experts.
[Guest 1]: So, and then, you know, it's like what you talked about, that family of dons, where Italian
[Amit Varma]: dons, where each don was shorter than the rest.
[Amit Varma]: I told a story in a previous episode about this mafia boss, where this mafia boss is
[Amit Varma]: five foot four or something.
[Amit Varma]: And then all the successive guys are shorter than him because he's only picking people
[Amit Varma]: who are not a threat to him.
[Guest 1]: So, you know, that's what we're seeing today, right?
[Guest 1]: If you don't have people who understand economics at the top, you're not going to have a cadre
[Guest 1]: of experts.
[Guest 1]: They're all going to leave, right?
[Guest 2]: I don't have any problem with Harvard versus hard work.
[Guest 2]: If you think hard work can substitute for Harvard, I'm all for it.
[Guest 2]: But are you doing the hard work?
[Guest 2]: Our entire discussion today.
[Guest 1]: I'm sorry, I don't agree.
[Guest 1]: You need both.
[Unknown]: Of course, of course, you do need both.
[Guest 2]: But I'm saying, I'm willing to give you a chance to prove that you're right, but you're
[Guest 2]: not doing your part of the equation.
[Guest 2]: You're not doing hard work, right?
[Guest 2]: You're only doing politics, narrative.
[Guest 2]: So, so fine, if you if you don't like people from Harvard and you want to bring in people,
[Guest 2]: you know, who like this, they are Indian economists or whatever, you know, historians, fine.
[Guest 2]: I mean, if their hard work can do things for us, all right, let's give them a chance.
[Guest 2]: But who's doing the hard work?
[Guest 2]: Nobody's doing the hard work.
[Amit Varma]: Nobody is even talking about these things, like Mohit said, which is a fundamental point.
[Amit Varma]: We are talking about history.
[Guest 1]: We are rewriting history.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, we are.
[Guest 1]: But really what dismays me is that if I were to look at the building blocks of the economy
[Guest 1]: and what it is today, these are some of the factors that I look at, right?
[Guest 1]: Which is the effective exchange rate, the terms of trade between agriculture and industry,
[Guest 1]: rural employment versus what is the, what is the agricultural income of the average
[Guest 1]: agricultural family?
[Guest 1]: How are our exports growing?
[Guest 1]: How competitive are we in terms of exports?
[Guest 1]: What are the factors responsible?
[Guest 1]: These are 20 things that I would look at.
[Guest 1]: I'm not a practicing economist, right?
[Guest 1]: I'm somebody for whom this is a hobby.
[Guest 1]: My main business is something else.
[Guest 1]: But even I know that we should be talking about these things.
[Guest 1]: Forget the ministries, forget the governments.
[Guest 1]: I don't see these issues being discussed in the press.
[Guest 1]: And that's going back to where we started.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I did an episode with Shivam Shankar Singh recently, and he pointed out that he
[Amit Varma]: was in the BJP for a while and he had bought into the development rhetoric.
[Amit Varma]: When he realized it isn't working out, he left.
[Amit Varma]: So, credit to him for that.
[Amit Varma]: But he pointed out that what he was told explicitly within the BJP when they were planning for
[Amit Varma]: the 2019 elections was, we will not talk about development.
[Amit Varma]: We spoke about it in 2014.
[Amit Varma]: Now, if we talk about it, they'll ask us for our track record.
[Amit Varma]: So, we won't talk about it because implicitly, you're admitting there is no track record.
[Guest 2]: In 2024, they won't talk about national security.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, they won't talk about national security.
[Unknown]: I mean, yeah, they won't.
[Guest 1]: What's in store then?
[Guest 1]: God knows how far China will go.
[Guest 1]: That's already clear, right?
[Guest 1]: Now the enemy is within.
[Guest 1]: This is what Doval and Rawat are saying, right?
[Guest 1]: Civil society is your enemy.
[Guest 1]: It's not outside.
[Amit Varma]: And China's built a village in Arunachal Pradesh, so there goes that.
[Amit Varma]: So, yeah, so you can't talk about that.
[Guest 1]: So, you talk about the enemy within.
[Guest 1]: The National Convention of BJP just finished.
[Guest 1]: There was no economic resolution.
[Guest 1]: They don't even have an economic cell in the party.
[Guest 2]: And if they did, it would be, it would have historians in charge.
[Unknown]: So, what can we say?
[Amit Varma]: It would have historians in charge, so what can we say?
[Amit Varma]: Let's get back to kind of talking about the economy.
[Amit Varma]: Though, of course, the economy and politics are coupled in this really toxic way.
[Amit Varma]: Give me a sense of where things were before COVID.
[Amit Varma]: Like one narrative that is going to be spun is that things that have gone wrong have gone
[Amit Varma]: wrong because pandemic aagiya hum kya kare.
[Amit Varma]: And I've done various episodes before COVID, including, you know, one with Vivek Kaul on
[Amit Varma]: the economy in 2019, and we've kind of discussed it endlessly.
[Amit Varma]: And throughout, it was very obvious that things are really bad.
[Amit Varma]: And so give me a sense of what things were like before COVID.
[Amit Varma]: What was the banking crisis like?
[Amit Varma]: You know, what was employment like?
[Amit Varma]: What was, you know, in general, where would you say are the fault lines?
[Amit Varma]: Where were we headed in a good direction?
[Amit Varma]: Where were we getting far worse?
[Amit Varma]: What would you have been most worried about?
[Guest 1]: So, things were already bad before COVID hit, right?
[Guest 1]: As I said, things were bad even before demonetization.
[Guest 1]: They got worse.
[Guest 1]: So, again, let's not talk impressionistic.
[Guest 1]: Let's talk about numbers and numbers that are public.
[Guest 1]: Again, we know, for example, that household debt, this is a measure of misery, right?
[Guest 1]: In a sense, living beyond your means.
[Guest 1]: So, household debt has gone up from 31.5% in 2015, 31.5% of GDP.
[Guest 1]: It is now 38.3%.
[Guest 1]: Now as in at this moment?
[Guest 1]: At this point in time, okay?
[Guest 1]: It was about 36% before COVID hit.
[Guest 1]: So, it was already going up, right?
[Guest 1]: I did a very interesting number crunching this morning, very minor.
[Guest 1]: You can say it's just an anecdote.
[Guest 1]: But as far as I'm concerned, what is the purpose of an economy?
[Guest 1]: The purpose of an economy is for people to consume.
[Guest 1]: Everything else is an instrumentality towards that, right?
[Guest 1]: And partly for reasons of loyalty, because my first job was with them.
[Guest 1]: Partly because they are the biggest consumer company in the country.
[Guest 1]: I looked at Hindustan lever data, okay?
[Guest 1]: Hindustan lever turnover from 2010 to 2015 went up by 75%, about 14, 15% per annum.
[Guest 1]: From 2015 to 2020, maybe I should have done the interpolation as well.
[Guest 1]: It has gone up by 25%, which means four or 5% per annum, okay?
[Guest 1]: So, the slowdown is massive.
[Guest 1]: Now, should I have taken 2014, 2015, it doesn't matter, it was just a rough sum,
[Guest 1]: just to see like, what is the level of deceleration?
[Guest 1]: The level of deceleration is massive.
[Guest 1]: And I could see this, you know, as I said, high frequency data.
[Guest 1]: I'm looking at high frequency data from two points of view.
[Guest 1]: One is sitting on the board of consumer goods companies, et cetera.
[Guest 1]: And second is an investor.
[Guest 1]: I'm paying for future, right?
[Guest 1]: So, if growth is not happening, I'm worried.
[Guest 1]: I've got to take money out off the table.
[Guest 1]: Thirdly, and this is, I would say, one of my favorite measures,
[Guest 1]: which is, what percentage of adult able-bodied people are productively used in the economy?
[Guest 1]: Because if a high percentage is used gradually, yes, you will see
[Guest 1]: yes, you will improve productivity, et cetera.
[Guest 1]: But they must be there to contribute to the economy.
[Guest 1]: We were already among the lowest in the world, 42%.
[Guest 1]: We dipped to some 36 or 37, we're back to 39%.
[Guest 1]: Countries which have become miracle economies, they have 70%,
[Guest 1]: 72% of adult working age population employed in the economy.
[Guest 1]: We have 40%.
[Guest 1]: So, we have not been able to figure out how to fit those pieces together.
[Guest 1]: As a system, I'm not talking top down.
[Guest 1]: I don't believe in that.
[Guest 1]: But our system has not been able to fit those pieces together.
[Guest 1]: That my availability as a body and a mind can contribute to the growth of this economy.
[Guest 1]: So, they were already bad.
[Guest 2]: I think that's because of the politics.
[Guest 2]: You know, there is no need to figure out the answer to that,
[Guest 2]: because I can just go to the voter and promise them an NREGA handout,
[Guest 2]: or I mean, let's not call it a handout.
[Guest 2]: You work for 10 hours hard manual labor,
[Guest 2]: I'll give you 150 rupees or 200 whatever the wage rate is currently at the end of the day.
[Guest 2]: For as long as you do 10 hours hard manual labor day after day, every day,
[Guest 2]: you will get this money, the day you don't do it,
[Guest 2]: you won't get to eat because you can't really save on those wages.
[Guest 2]: And because you can't save, you can't educate your child, you know,
[Guest 2]: you can't scale your child, your child will do the same thing.
[Guest 2]: And generation after generation, you will be tied to NREGA.
[Guest 2]: NREGA is very good because I agree that it set a floor to wage rates,
[Guest 2]: which also fed into the rural wage rates,
[Guest 2]: which we talked about how that helped the growth rates earlier.
[Guest 2]: But is it an anti-poverty program?
[Guest 2]: No, it's a safety net.
[Guest 2]: But we treat it like we will compensate you for our failures of growing the economy
[Guest 2]: and creating jobs for you and developing the economy by giving you NREGA.
[Guest 2]: That is one model.
[Guest 2]: The competing model is that we will,
[Guest 2]: because of our failure to do economic policy right,
[Guest 2]: to fix the economic model, to not create enough jobs,
[Guest 2]: to not generate enough growth,
[Guest 2]: for that failure, we will compensate you with a cheap loan,
[Guest 2]: which we will, you know, call a mudra loan and not ask you to give it back to us.
[Guest 2]: We will give you the scheme where they give toilets,
[Guest 2]: cooking gas with one cylinder, you may not be able to refill it.
[Guest 2]: And what is now called the Modi government's welfare paradigm.
[Guest 2]: Why, you know, are you doing this paradigm, this welfare narrative?
[Guest 2]: Because you're not doing the first thing you're supposed to do.
[Guest 2]: The government is supposed to fix the economy.
[Guest 2]: You're not doing that.
[Guest 2]: So you're compensating people for your failure by giving them this,
[Guest 2]: which is better than, you know, what happens in the state politics
[Guest 2]: where you give saris and television sets, etc.
[Guest 2]: But it's still just the same thing.
[Guest 1]: So on MNREGA, in fact, what has happened is that
[Guest 1]: the wages paid under NREGA have not been going up.
[Guest 1]: They're supposed to be inflation indexed.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, but they're not.
[Guest 1]: And today the NREGA payment is well below minimum wages.
[Guest 1]: So I have a quiz for you.
[Guest 1]: Registered households in UP, one of the poorest states in the country.
[Guest 1]: As per the program, you're supposed to get 100 days per household, right?
[Guest 1]: Last year, what was the average number of days that a household got wage labor under NREGA?
[Guest 1]: I haven't checked the data, but the average demand is higher, supposedly, around the country.
[Guest 1]: Eleven! So it's not working, right?
[Amit Varma]: There's a phrase I learned from our mutual friend, Mohit Kumar Anand,
[Amit Varma]: which is PPP, perpetually planned poverty,
[Amit Varma]: which sounds exactly like the dependency that you described can happen under MNREGA,
[Amit Varma]: where you don't save anything.
[Amit Varma]: So you're always just dependent on that.
[Amit Varma]: And you can't educate yourself.
[Unknown]: You can't build human capital.
[Unknown]: How is it a solution?
[Amit Varma]: Your kids are also going to do the same damn thing.
[Guest 1]: It's perpetually planned poverty.
[Guest 1]: Amit, the point I'm making is that even that has not worked.
[Guest 2]: And even then, because people wanted 100 days, they were getting 7, 8, 10, 11.
[Guest 1]: In the poorest states in our country, Bihar and UP, they were getting 7, 8, 10, 11 days.
[Guest 1]: And they may not be getting paid for those 11 days also.
[Guest 1]: Let's assume, let's take everything on the basis of facts, not assume anything.
[Guest 1]: These are, this is data available.
[Guest 1]: Parliament questions.
[Guest 1]: This is data.
[Guest 2]: And why? Because doing, you know, changing the economic model,
[Guest 2]: understanding deeply what the economy needs is all hard work.
[Guest 2]: It's seriously wonkish work.
[Guest 2]: Why do you, why would you do that when you can, you know,
[Guest 2]: get votes by doing some very simple things?
[Guest 2]: And you don't trust experts anyway.
[Amit Varma]: So there you go.
[Amit Varma]: So let's go through the last few months.
[Amit Varma]: How has COVID exacerbated this?
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, where's COVID kind of taking us?
[Amit Varma]: Like one image that I have in my mind from pre-COVID, from before,
[Amit Varma]: from three or four years ago, was again our friend Kumar,
[Amit Varma]: traveling through Bihar and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: He came to, you know, he'd visited Mumbai just after going through Bihar.
[Amit Varma]: And he painted the stark image of me.
[Amit Varma]: He said that wherever he goes, you know, on railway stations or at the Paanwala or on the road outside,
[Amit Varma]: he sees groups of young men who are just standing there doing nothing.
[Amit Varma]: And it's almost like a frightening thought.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, you know, this speaks to the unemployment.
[Amit Varma]: This speaks to the loss of hope.
[Amit Varma]: This speaks to law and order, law and order.
[Amit Varma]: It just speaks to so many things.
[Guest 1]: Amit, I don't think that that has changed drastically.
[Guest 1]: It was always the case throughout our decades.
[Guest 1]: The image I see for the last 40 years, we are recording this in South Delhi.
[Guest 1]: We're recording this in South Delhi, two kilometers from my house.
[Guest 1]: Between this place and my house, there's a place where 40 years, every morning,
[Guest 1]: there's a market.
[Guest 1]: It's a market not for flowers, not for vegetables, not for meat, but for human beings.
[Guest 1]: This is daily wage labor who is gathered over there.
[Unknown]: I've seen.
[Guest 1]: I've seen who will come and employ them for daily wages.
[Guest 1]: You can go and pick them up at whatever the prevailing the hardy is,
[Guest 1]: meaning the daily wage, whether it's 300 or 400 or 250, you know, as it's moved.
[Guest 1]: And obviously, they're not skilled, right?
[Guest 1]: They wouldn't be standing there.
[Guest 1]: They'll come, they'll move boxes, they'll swab your floors.
[Guest 1]: Some of them claim that they can paint, etc, etc.
[Guest 1]: But they're just bodies.
[Guest 1]: It's almost like a slave market, because their bodies are on hire for the day.
[Guest 1]: And at 10 o'clock or 1030, when it becomes obvious that they're not being hired,
[Guest 1]: they may or may not have money for the rest of the day to feed themselves.
[Guest 1]: Because these are largely people who've left their villages and come here,
[Guest 1]: looking for this kind of work.
[Guest 1]: This has always been a feature.
[Guest 1]: Okay.
[Guest 1]: After COVID, what happened?
[Guest 1]: You had two things.
[Guest 1]: One is that a lot of them went back home.
[Guest 1]: But at the same time, the employment market bottomed out.
[Guest 1]: So, the people who were left over here, they had no dignity left, no hope left.
[Guest 1]: And a very close friend of mine, who lives in Delhi University, started a Mazdoor kitchen,
[Guest 1]: daily feeding program for those who got left behind.
[Guest 1]: And I was a little bit involved with it. And the idea was that we will need to do this for
[Guest 1]: three months. The three months became six months.
[Guest 1]: It is still continuing.
[Guest 1]: 17 months later.
[Guest 1]: And very recently, I was in Delhi on a trip from the village.
[Guest 1]: I drove from Delhi University back home.
[Guest 1]: And I saw that even though the distribution was going to begin at four o'clock, by two o'clock,
[Guest 1]: there was a line of 500 people going all the way from ISBT to Red Fort,
[Guest 1]: just waiting for that one daily meal.
[Guest 1]: So, I'm saying two things. Firstly, this always existed.
[Unknown]: But secondly, it's got worse.
[Guest 1]: In fact, I wrote a column last year, talking at the start of COVID, in April, talking about how
[Amit Varma]: we are faced with two disasters. And one is COVID-19. And the other is the ongoing disaster
[Amit Varma]: of the dysfunctional Indian state. You know, where, and you know, like some of the figures
[Amit Varma]: I gave was, you know, 3,000 children die in India every day from starvation. One in four
[Amit Varma]: Indian children are malnourished. And one in four Indian women are malnourished. And
[Amit Varma]: one in four Indian children are malnourished. And so on and so forth, you can go on.
[Guest 1]: And that figure has probably increased.
[Amit Varma]: Possibly. But the larger issue is that there are so many things that are a fact of life today.
[Amit Varma]: If they were caused by a natural disaster, like a cyclone or a virus or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: we would say this is a national moral emergency, we need to do something.
[Amit Varma]: But it's been normalized. It's been like this for,
[Amit Varma]: you know, 75 years. And it's just normalized now. And we don't, that's a very kind of
[Amit Varma]: important point where it's not just about talking about the state of the economy today,
[Amit Varma]: but it's also talking about how we've normalized so many of these things. And as you just pointed
[Amit Varma]: out, this is, you know, not something new.
[Guest 1]: We've normalized the fact that 60 or 70% of young people routinely give up hope of getting a job.
[Guest 1]: If you look at the data, and you see how they move out of the labor market,
[Guest 1]: they don't say they're unemployed. The way in which the data is collected,
[Guest 1]: they don't say they're unemployed because they're not looking for a job.
[Guest 1]: And they're not looking for a job because they tried for five years and they didn't find a job.
[Guest 1]: So in terms of their own peace of mind, they now need to say we're not looking for a job.
[Guest 1]: And they make do. And these are the people who I see every day in the village.
[Guest 1]: Young able-bodied men of between 20 and 40 who are making do, they don't have a job.
[Guest 2]: It's a bit like, you know, women suffer violence at home. It's almost like that.
[Guest 2]: One of my earliest reporting assignments was, I think I'm talking about either Rajasthan or
[Guest 2]: Mandipuradesh, Rajasthan, I think, on NREGA. So I was asking these workers in this village,
[Guest 2]: have you been paid? And they said, some of them had pending payments. So I said, you know,
[Guest 2]: under the provisions of the law, if you're not paid for this period of time, you know,
[Guest 2]: you can go and make a complaint. And this is guaranteed, you know, this is not allowed.
[Guest 2]: Amongst the people I was speaking to was this one village woman. And she said,
[Guest 2]: you go and make this complaint for me. If you're asking me to go and make a complaint for you,
[Guest 2]: you go and make this complaint for me. If you're asking me to do it, you go and do it. She was very
[Guest 2]: polite. That's how you learn, you know, you're so naive. So I said, no, why can't you make this
[Guest 2]: complaint? She said, you know, I'm a widow, and I take care of two little children. When these men,
[Guest 2]: you know, do things with me, even then I can't go to the police station and make a complaint.
[Guest 2]: So I can't go and make any complaints to any of the Adhikaaris, because it doesn't work like that
[Guest 2]: in the village here. And, you know, so when we think we've come up with these great policy
[Guest 2]: solutions to problems, do we really know what the ground realities are? When we talk about them in
[Guest 2]: Delhi as journalists and commentators, do we even know what we're talking about? You know,
[Amit Varma]: so the hard work is missing everywhere. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Let's pick up on the thread that you mentioned at the start of the episode, Mohit, where you
[Amit Varma]: spoke about how you're walking in Satholi and for the first time in these 30 years, someone stops
[Amit Varma]: and asks you for a job. And I remember I did an episode with Tamil Bandhu Padhyay who'd written
[Amit Varma]: Pandemonium Red Book on banks. And one thought it will be a dry episode about banks. But I always
[Amit Varma]: love having these personal chats before we start. And it was very moving. He was very moved because
[Amit Varma]: I just started by to break the ice by asking him about how his COVID months were. And because I was
[Amit Varma]: like literally my first physical recording, you know, before the second wave happened,
[Amit Varma]: but in I think January this year, and he spoke about going out in the streets of Bandra. And
[Amit Varma]: there were these little kids who would earlier be selling things, but now they were begging.
[Amit Varma]: And there was a well-dressed guy who took his hand and he got worried, but took him into this
[Amit Varma]: lane where there was a biryani wala and said, please buy me biryani. That's all I want. I just
[Amit Varma]: want food. And, you know, and it's, it's, and these are new things, you know, and COVID to me,
[Amit Varma]: it seems that it is almost common sense that there is a fundamental shift.
[Amit Varma]: What is the movement of humanity? The movement of humanity is from villages to cities where people
[Amit Varma]: are, where larger economic networks are, you want a job, you go there, you're full of hope,
[Amit Varma]: you know, that's a movement. It's a great movement, right? That's what lifts people up.
[Amit Varma]: And what we had in COVID was millions of people having to take the reverse journey back when they
[Amit Varma]: lose hope, and they have to go back. And in villages, like, you know, like the person Mohit
[Amit Varma]: met, where there's no hope, there's, there's nothing, it's just, and I can't imagine myself
[Amit Varma]: in that position, that how do you then live like, you know, I recommended this film to you by Ramin
[Amit Varma]: Behrani called Goodbye Solo. And there's a great review of that by Roger Ebert, where Ebert says
[Amit Varma]: he spoke to Behrani. And Behrani said that the fundamental question of a cinema is how do you
[Amit Varma]: live in this world. And I think there's just such a fundamental shift there. And I can't fathom some
[Amit Varma]: of this. You know, the film was about how these two people shift during the film. That too, that
[Amit Varma]: too. But it's a fundamental question. And at one level, it's an existential metaphysical question,
[Amit Varma]: how do you live in this world? But at another level, it's a real sort of question of how do
[Amit Varma]: you live in this world? Where do I get my next meal from? All these people come to cities, jobs
[Amit Varma]: are gone, nothing is there. There's no transport, they have to go back home. And they're going back
[Amit Varma]: home. And what's happened after that? Like, what's the scene? How does it affect the economy?
[Amit Varma]: We like the economy seems like this dry thing. But the economy is a collection of people who
[Amit Varma]: are living these real human dramas. So give me a sense of how you think COVID changed things. Like
[Amit Varma]: was it less fundamental than it seems in the dramatic way that I'm perhaps describing it now?
[Guest 2]: Oh, it's the connection between. So the word I use for this part of the economy is the informal
[Guest 2]: economy. It's not that your informal economy is shrunk. My sense is we don't know until we measure
[Guest 2]: it. My sense is that the connection between the informal economy and the formal economy is broken
[Guest 2]: down. So you're not capturing information about them, because they've all gone back to their
[Guest 2]: villages, some units have shut down, you're only looking at the formal economy, your consumption
[Guest 2]: base now largely is government and people who draw salaries and pensions, inflation indexed
[Guest 2]: from government, PSUs, etc, etc. That is your consumption base. Those are the people who are
[Guest 2]: cushioned from what happened because of COVID. They're driving, you know, their savings and
[Guest 2]: investments are driving the stock market. They are driving the pent up demand, you know, that we talk
[Guest 2]: of that led to this mini bounce. And eventually our GDP will only estimate their GDP. And we'll
[Guest 1]: just feel that, you know, we have recovered. So I have a couple of reactions to that.
[Guest 1]: The first is that losses in the informal economy are real. When, you know, it's not just the
[Guest 1]: connections breaking, the losses are real. Units have shut down. So that's number one. Units have
[Guest 1]: shut down, shops have shut down, dhabas have shut down, roadside stalls have shut down. So there's
[Guest 1]: a real diminution. Secondly, that when people talk about the formalization of the economy,
[Guest 1]: the economy, and they say that, you know, that production has shifted to the formal economy.
[Guest 1]: Yes, it has. But everybody who's a producer or an employee of a producer is also a consumer.
[Guest 1]: And if he's lost his job, or if the factory owner has lost his monthly profit, their ability to
[Guest 1]: spend in the economy has also gone down. So on a static basis, you know, if you say yesterday and
[Guest 1]: today, the demand of those 10 biscuit factories in the informal sector, which shut down, will shift
[Guest 1]: to a Britannia. Right. But those 200 people and those 10 factory owners, their income has gone
[Guest 1]: down. Their consumption has gone down. A year later, it will reflect in lower growth for Britannia
[Guest 1]: also. You won't see that at first you'll see a bounce, but later reflect. So that's the first
[Guest 1]: point. Surprisingly, as far as the human point, which we're talking about, this is something that
[Guest 1]: really struck me in my interactions with individuals over this last summer, is that
[Guest 1]: they've been very philosophical about it. Because at least these individuals, I'm not talking about
[Guest 1]: the people who couldn't go back, who are lining the streets of Daryaganj and ISBT, etc. These
[Guest 1]: people who've gone back, they're quite accepting of that reality. Because in the village,
[Guest 1]: nobody's starving. At least, I'm only talking about my home, you know, in the villages around,
[Guest 1]: nobody's starving. So, we earned better income, we could send money back home.
[Guest 1]: Now, we're back home. We don't know whether we'll go back to the city. We readjust, recalibrate to
[Guest 1]: the fact that now we're going to live off the land, etc. And recalibration is showing in the
[Guest 2]: slogans. From Ache Din, aspirational Indians to Atmanir Bharta. Whoever has made that transitional
[Guest 2]: in slogans has obviously, you know, observed what you're saying. Yeah, great point. But the
[Guest 1]: resilience is quite remarkable. Nobody's desperate, you know. We are so fatalistic, Amit.
[Guest 1]: Okay, this is also a reality. We went, we experienced that, we came back. Okay, this is also okay.
[Amit Varma]: You know, every time Mumbai is hit by something, people will talk about the spirit of Mumbai. And
[Amit Varma]: I'm like, what are you talking about? People are going back to work because they have no choice.
[Amit Varma]: Because they have no choice. It's not their bloody spirit. What are they going to do?
[Amit Varma]: And I think this fatalism really kind of also explains a little bit of the puzzle behind
[Amit Varma]: political accountability. The government demonetization, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah,
[Amit Varma]: emergency, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. But people still vote them back. And I think part of the
[Amit Varma]: reason is that people just assume that their lives are hellholes. And this is how it is.
[Amit Varma]: And they don't kind of make that connection necessarily between governance and politics. And
[Amit Varma]: then they just choose their tribe. And it's a separate thing. And they assume every government
[Amit Varma]: that comes is going to be a bad one, which is kind of true. So to some extent, it's true.
[Amit Varma]: So looking at the economy as it is now, right? How do you feel? Are things all bad? Are there,
[Amit Varma]: you know, are there silver linings?
[Guest 1]: There are silver linings. Of course, there are silver linings. But
[Guest 1]: is the GDP going to grow by six or seven percent once we get out of COVID? I don't think so.
[Guest 1]: Because we were already suffering before. We're suffering now. Now if you look,
[Guest 1]: I don't want to get into data. But if you look at the broad structure of an economy,
[Guest 1]: I, of course, believe that the starter always for economic growth is investment,
[Guest 1]: which is, of course, the Hayekian way of looking at it.
[Guest 1]: Now, in a situation, so the RBI compiles this data regularly, what is the capacity utilization
[Guest 1]: of manufacturing? Let's start with manufacturing. And
[Guest 1]: the thumb rule is that somewhere when it starts creeping up from 70 towards 75,
[Guest 1]: you start getting investment. Because now I can see that a year from now,
[Guest 1]: I'm going to run out of capacity now. It's now at 60%. So private sector investment is going to be
[Guest 1]: very, very, very low. It was really low before COVID. If you look at the numbers, if you look at
[Guest 1]: the economy-wide, we've never seen the level of investment that we saw in 2011, where what is
[Guest 1]: called gross fixed capital formation was almost 40%. It's now at 30%. So a huge amount of investment
[Guest 1]: at 30%. It's a huge drift. If you look at corporates, it dropped every year from 2010 to 2017.
[Guest 1]: So this is pre-COVID, right? I have the figures. It went from 15% to 10% to 9.8% to 7.5%. And of
[Guest 1]: course, the year of demonetization, it reached 2.5%. Right? So this is hard data. Now you can say
[Guest 1]: 2.5%, maybe an accident, it had nothing to do with demonetization. Fair enough. The fact is
[Guest 1]: that that's where it was. Post 2011, investment by corporates was going down, down, down, down, down.
[Guest 1]: So you don't have capacity utilization. Why will they invest? They're not going to invest.
[Guest 1]: Or it can come from personal expenditure. Personal expenditure has also been going down.
[Guest 1]: Before the pandemic, when it became apparent that the economy is slowing,
[Guest 1]: what did the government do as its major economic measure? It reduced taxes for corporates.
[Guest 1]: You had a wrong diagnosis. Therefore, you had the wrong problem. The problem was not
[Guest 1]: that people are not investing because taxes are too high. People are not investing because
[Guest 1]: there's no consumer demand. Now, and this is very important for post-COVID.
[Guest 1]: When COVID happened, people lost jobs, economy, production also went down, etc, etc, etc.
[Guest 1]: What did they do in the West? One is, of course, you know, making sure the banks survive,
[Guest 1]: loans, etc. But if you look at the US, they injected something like, numbers vary, but let's
[Guest 1]: say about 12% of GDP was injected as personal support, money into your bank account. And in
[Guest 1]: many cases, for people who are working at minimum wage, the amount that they got by way of income
[Guest 1]: support was more than their earnings. They were getting $2,400 a month. Whereas if you're working
[Guest 1]: at minimum wage, even if you worked 200 hours a month, you may have been making only $1,800
[Guest 1]: because minimum wage varied from state to state. And you may not even be working 200 hours a month,
[Guest 1]: you may be working. People had excess savings as a result of the support by the government.
[Guest 1]: What it leads to in terms of debt and Fed balance sheets and so on is a different matter,
[Guest 1]: not relevant for this discussion. The point was that you kept consumption going.
[Guest 1]: What was bound to happen was what you see today, which is excess demand.
[Guest 1]: Because people got more money than they were used to. For 8-10 months, they couldn't consume,
[Guest 1]: they couldn't go to restaurants, they couldn't travel, etc, etc. Once all of those open up,
[Guest 1]: they want to do it with a vengeance. So, you've got that pent up demand, production has suffered,
[Guest 1]: and some of those people don't want to go back to work because they're making more sitting at home.
[Guest 1]: So, you have inflation. People say supply chain disruption, etc, etc. Nothing.
[Guest 1]: We learned a long time ago that inflation is everywhere a monetary phenomenon, right? You
[Guest 1]: pumped so much money into the system, you have inflation. Now, we have the worst of both worlds
[Guest 1]: because we are not self-sufficient in many things. Most of all, the two oils,
[Guest 1]: edible oil and crude oil. Both of them, we depend in one case 70% and the other case 80%
[Guest 1]: on imports. Now, we are in a situation where we are having to pay much more for these
[Guest 1]: because of supply chain disruption, stroke, government-fuelled inflation.
[Guest 1]: There, over here, reduced incomes, a double whammy. Consumer demand is not going to go up.
[Guest 1]: We've seen that private consumption expenditure has gone down. This data is available,
[Guest 1]: not contested, though they tried to suppress it. We see that that's gone down. Investment has gone
[Guest 1]: down. So, you only have one source left to stimulate demand, which is to stimulate the economy,
[Guest 1]: which is government expenditure. But at the same time, we have reached a situation where at the
[Guest 1]: end of this year, the debt-to-GDP ratio of India is going to be 90%. Whether it ends up at 88% or
[Guest 1]: 89% because we have fiscal buoyancy, etc., it's going to be 90%. By these broad international
[Guest 1]: thumb rules, once a developing country crosses 70%, 75%, it runs into dangerous problems.
[Guest 1]: It's considered to be in difficulty. We are already there. So, where is the kicker for
[Guest 1]: the revival of the economy going to come from? I don't see it. There's only one way to do it,
[Guest 1]: and that is politically so difficult, which is to kick-start exports by devaluing the
[Guest 1]: rupee massively. You can't do that. And you definitely can't do it in a situation where
[Guest 1]: you are importing inflation. Today, we are importing inflation, right? With crude oil
[Guest 1]: at 80 dirhams became a political hot potato. Finally, the government had to
[Guest 1]: bring down excise duty, which they said was paying for free vaccines.
[Guest 1]: So, they had to withdraw that, right? They had to drop the duty on edible oils. Again,
[Guest 1]: for the same reason, which is that we are importing inflation. If you are importing inflation,
[Guest 1]: that inflation is not because of money into the hands of Indian consumers. You are importing it
[Guest 1]: because other governments have put money into the hands of their consumers. Now, you're stuck
[Guest 1]: between the devil and the deep blue sea. You can't grow the economy internally. If you try to
[Guest 1]: grow it externally, your imported inflation goes up. Because if, for example, you weaken the rupee
[Guest 1]: from 75 to say 100 rupees, the cost of Incidentally, all the hated experts have
[Guest 2]: been pointing this out for two years, but nobody paid attention to them. And our central bank is
[Guest 2]: so proud of their, what they like to also, you know, informally call quantitative easing. But
[Guest 2]: the quantitative easing was done in the US because they were trying to avoid deflation and they've
[Guest 2]: ended up, you know, yeah, overheating the economy. We were already to begin with, you know, above the
[Guest 2]: tolerance ban. And we, the RBI was doing QE over here. Nobody ever asks why this liquidity, you
[Guest 2]: know, massive liquidity operation was done. The finance minister should have asked them. They
[Guest 2]: haven't asked them. The commentator should have asked them. They haven't asked them. The economist
[Guest 2]: and the finance minister should have asked them. They haven't asked them.
[Guest 1]: But to be fair, there's another problem. Okay. And that problem is that it's not as though the
[Guest 1]: government is artificially keeping the rupee high or keeping it uncompetitive. One of the reasons
[Guest 1]: that it's happening is because all of that flood of liquidity across the globe is coming into India
[Guest 1]: in the form of investment. And that's driving the rupee higher, not allowing it to depreciate and
[Guest 1]: become cheaper. Therefore, weakening the rupee would actually require more intervention from
[Guest 1]: the government than its current rate. So, it's not easy to do. And anytime you try and do something
[Guest 1]: anytime you try and do something drastic like that, it can have massive second and third and
[Guest 1]: fourth order effects. So, I'm not saying it's easy to get out of this. I'm saying the opposite.
[Guest 1]: I'm saying it's going to be really difficult to get out of this. It may be forced on you.
[Guest 1]: For example, supposing like the US Fed and Europe, etc. are talking about the taper,
[Guest 1]: which means reducing the support to the financial markets, less money going in, complex issue.
[Guest 1]: But supposing that works, supposing they're able to go ahead with their intention.
[Guest 1]: And as a result, and we've seen this before, we saw it in 2007, 2008, we saw it in 2013,
[Guest 1]: who suffers first when liquidity shrinks is not your home market, which is the US. It's people
[Guest 1]: who are the furthest end of the pipe, which will mean India, Vietnam, etc. So, you could have that
[Guest 1]: happen tomorrow beyond your control. So, if I was in charge of managing foreign exchange rates in
[Guest 1]: India, I wouldn't know what to do. You know, I'm not saying that's an easy answer. It's very,
[Guest 1]: very complicated. So, I'm just trying to underline the fact that we're in a really,
[Guest 1]: really difficult spot. I don't see any easy answers.
[Amit Varma]: This is shocking, because at the start of your answer, Mohit, you spoke about,
[Amit Varma]: yes, of course, there are silver linings.
[Guest 1]: So, you know, the question is whether you cut the court first to fit,
[Guest 1]: or you cut the lining first. So, I've cut the court first.
[Amit Varma]: I thought you're going to cut the client.
[Guest 1]: So, now I'll talk about the lining. The one silver lining, and I'm not sure if it's going
[Guest 1]: to solve the problems or not. The one silver lining is, again, coming from deep personal
[Guest 1]: experience, which is the quality, the passion, the drive, the ambition of our startup culture.
[Guest 1]: It is just mind-blowing. I've worked or not worked, you know what my life has been like,
[Guest 1]: right? But in some sort of measure, I've been a working adult for now, 44 years.
[Guest 1]: I have seen and experienced and learned more in the last five years than in the previous 40.
[Guest 1]: And in the previous 40, because of the deep thought and the hard work.
[Amit Varma]: Harvard and hard work.
[Guest 1]: No, not Harvard. That's the other incredible thing. That's the incredible thing that,
[Guest 1]: with almost no exception, all these young entrepreneurs that I've worked with,
[Guest 1]: they come from all across India. But I was telling you this morning, for the first
[Guest 1]: 35 years of my life, everybody who was a business partner in some shape or form,
[Guest 1]: went to one of four Delhi schools and one of five institutions.
[Guest 1]: And that was my world. That was the world I knew. Over the last five years, I've worked with people
[Guest 1]: who were born in Tundla. Have you even heard the name of the place, Tundla? There you go.
[Guest 1]: Sounds like a bad vegetable.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, okay. It's a railway junction in UP, somewhere near Agra. Someone from Agra, Dhanbad,
[Guest 1]: Pune, a small town in a district in Bihar, I don't remember which one.
[Guest 1]: You name it. And the quality of thought, of passion, and the tenacity with which
[Guest 1]: they run their businesses. I would have thought that given the severity of the pandemic,
[Guest 1]: that half of them would get wiped out. I have direct investments in 40 startups, Amit,
[Guest 1]: and 10 indirectly. During the pandemic, not one is shut down.
[Guest 1]: That is, it's more than a silver lining, which I want to save it for the last. That gives me a lot
[Guest 1]: of hope. But you can't do anything when the macros are out of whack.
[Amit Varma]: The macros are out of whack. But there is that spirit, there is that drive,
[Amit Varma]: there is that hard work. And again, like I was pointing out to him in the morning that
[Amit Varma]: the fact that these people from small towns made it so far, that they're heading startups,
[Amit Varma]: obviously, there's a selection bias there as well. They are the outliers already. So they're
[Amit Varma]: likely to be outstanding. So Pooja, tell me if you were, you are, of course, not now being allowed
[Amit Varma]: into North Block, though, one would hope that there are these mysterious ways you found of
[Amit Varma]: sneaking into the labyrinthines, libraries of old parchments and manuscripts and kind of writing more
[Amit Varma]: books from those. But if you were in charge of North Block, you know, you know, just putting
[Amit Varma]: on the hat of a policy person, or rather forget North Block, if you were in the PMO, and you were
[Amit Varma]: the person, that mysterious person, that mysterious person who speaks and writes Gujarati, if you were
[Amit Varma]: that person, how would you look at this? Like, where would you begin solving it at a purely
[Amit Varma]: economical level? Assume that Modi ji and Amit Shah ji have sat you down and told you that,
[Amit Varma]: look, Pooja ji, we will manage politics, you tell us what to do economically. So what do you do?
[Guest 2]: I'm sorry, Amit, if it was that easy, they would do it.
[Guest 2]: It's a thought experiment.
[Guest 2]: I don't know. I don't know the answer to this question. I'm not trained to find solutions.
[Amit Varma]: How would you begin thinking about it? Like what are the questions that we are not asking ourselves?
[Guest 2]: So the first thing I would do is I would call the experts, set up a committee and tell them,
[Guest 2]: please give me action points. And I will set up a committee of people who think these people know
[Guest 2]: nothing and ask them to give me action points. I would study the two, I would break my head over
[Guest 2]: studying what the two are saying. And I would call people from the ground, from the districts,
[Guest 2]: maybe officials, maybe politicians, maybe representatives of farmer groups and you know,
[Guest 2]: whatever. And I would tell them that if such a thing was done, you know, a consultative process,
[Guest 2]: if such a thing was done, you know, are these people just sitting in ivory towers and telling
[Guest 2]: me these things? What do you think? How will it work? And then do pilots and then begin to,
[Guest 2]: you know, take policy decisions. I will not do schemes. You don't do schemes in the center,
[Guest 2]: you do schemes in the state. I will call the RBI and tell them that, you know, I want macroeconomic
[Guest 2]: stability, all the problems that Mohit has just described, I want you to get a handle on this.
[Guest 2]: And I want you to, you know, find ways of, I know it's difficult, but I want you to find ways of
[Guest 2]: handling this. And when you don't know the answers, you get the people, you delegate,
[Guest 2]: you know, you get people who know the answers and who know the problems to sit and talk and
[Amit Varma]: find solutions. That's what I believe. No, that's a great answer, because the
[Amit Varma]: answer lies in processes. And that's just what she outlined. And I wish more people thought like
[Guest 1]: this. I want to go half a step back. Are you sure? Which is first, somebody's got to acknowledge
[Amit Varma]: that there's a problem. There was no second wave. All is well.
[Guest 2]: And whatever problem it is, do it yourself. You have to solve it, solve your problem for yourself,
[Amit Varma]: like these group of startups are doing. So another question about something that is
[Amit Varma]: outside our control, which you kind of referred to earlier, which is the flow of easy money,
[Amit Varma]: which is coming from the West. Now, one reason that stock markets are buoyant, and I'm sure you
[Amit Varma]: can point me to other reasons, but one reasons that stock markets are buoyant, and there is,
[Amit Varma]: in fact, so much money going into crypto, even which I'll come to later, though, I don't know
[Amit Varma]: if it's actually relevant for the subject is, of course, the easy money coming in from outside.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that there, you know, like, of course, if you just print money and give it out,
[Amit Varma]: there's inflation. But before that, there is something called the Cantillon effect,
[Amit Varma]: where the money goes out to a certain set of people at the top, and they benefit first,
[Amit Varma]: and then it kind of percolate downwards. And when I look at sort of the way the
[Amit Varma]: stock market is doing, and so on, you know, it seems to me that it's kind of like the Cantillon
[Amit Varma]: effect at play. And please tell me if I'm wrong, and I'm just being a Monday morning quarterback
[Amit Varma]: myself and the show releases on Monday. And it seems to me that there is that kind of effect
[Amit Varma]: on play. And the danger of that is that it exacerbates inequality, like typically,
[Amit Varma]: I have also, you know, written a piece on how India should worry about poverty, not inequality,
[Amit Varma]: and poverty is our key concern. And that's in the context of the overall economy. But in this case,
[Amit Varma]: it seems to me that inequality is a big concern, because all of this easy money is coming
[Amit Varma]: essentially to the richie-riches first, who are kind of, you know, expanding their wealth in real
[Amit Varma]: terms, you know, by the time it goes down the ladder, and you actually have inflation in the
[Amit Varma]: real economy, the poor have just gotten even more sort of, I can't think of a better word than the
[Guest 1]: word I almost did not use. But absolutely right. So this is a different form of inflation, right?
[Guest 1]: This is asset price inflation. So it's inflation. And I think there are several problems with this.
[Guest 1]: Firstly, I think the point that you made, which is that, you know, I'm not bothered by inequality,
[Guest 1]: I'm typically bothered by poverty. Let's just stick to poverty. Earlier on in the show, I said
[Guest 1]: that Rakesh Kochar of the Pew Foundation using World Bank data has demonstrated that 75
[Guest 1]: million additional people in India have dropped below the poverty line. Let's talk about that.
[Guest 1]: If the rich get richer, that's fine. It's not a problem for me.
[Guest 1]: Except if I don't get into the stock market at the right time, then it's a problem for me. But
[Guest 1]: otherwise, it's not a problem, right? And, but I think there are, that too can have its own problems.
[Guest 1]: The first problem is that it encourages the continuance of a false narrative of all is well.
[Guest 1]: And everybody sitting in the cities, which is where all the news is produced, actually thinks
[Guest 1]: all is well. Because they didn't lose their jobs. They're easily able to pay their EMIs. If they
[Guest 1]: work for the government, they've got cost of living adjustment, etc, etc. Plus, their wealth is going
[Guest 1]: up. So, you have a very peculiar problem, which is, I talked about earlier, the fact that household
[Guest 1]: debt as a percentage to GDP has gone up. So, you have a very peculiar phenomenon, which is that
[Guest 1]: the number of people seeking gold loans has gone up. Because that's the only asset you have left.
[Guest 1]: The only bankable asset you have left is gold. So, the number of people seeking gold loans has
[Guest 1]: gone up. At the same time, the sales of jewellery at Tanishq have also gone up.
[Guest 1]: The city and the city.
[Guest 1]: This is the K-effect, what we call K-shaped recovery. The city and the city.
[Guest 1]: So, you're creating a false narrative. The second problem is going to be a longer-term one.
[Guest 1]: Which is, we have seen this time and time and time again.
[Guest 1]: Which is that the maximum number of new investors come in at the top of the market.
[Guest 1]: People like me, who've been watching and involved in markets for 25-30 years,
[Guest 1]: they may not get the timing right, but they'll rarely get caught with their pants down.
[Guest 1]: And they'll know when to scoot. So, maybe I should be out of the market already. Maybe I'm not. Maybe
[Guest 1]: I am. That's not the point. I can dance better than you can. This is a reality.
[Amit Varma]: Reference to the Chuck Prince quote, when the music plays, you have to dance.
[Guest 1]: Exactly. Reference also to the fact that I'm a better dancer than you.
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to call anything anyone says about me, which I can call fat shaming.
[Guest 1]: So, I can get out. Plus, I've been making money from the stock market and from my assets for 25-30
[Guest 1]: years. I know that there are ups and downs. But if I have become an investor in financial assets
[Guest 1]: for the first time, during this bubble, it is a bubble, it is an asset price bubble,
[Guest 1]: I'm going to be hurt so badly that I'm never going to participate in financial markets again.
[Guest 1]: I'll go back to FDs. So, you are actually going to hollow out the stock markets as a result,
[Guest 1]: if you have a massive drop. That's the second problem.
[Guest 1]: And then it's going to have all kinds of other, because today,
[Guest 1]: and this is a danger which, you know, it's on my sort of agenda for topics to discuss
[Guest 1]: with startups this quarter. I typically, the startups I mentor, I have monthly meetings
[Guest 1]: with them, some which I don't have such an active relationship, I have quarterly meetings,
[Guest 1]: larger group of investors. This month's reviews have got delayed because of Diwali,
[Guest 1]: they're going to all start in earnest tomorrow. Is this question.
[Guest 1]: Is this question. More funding, second round, third round, fourth round of investment is very
[Guest 1]: welcome. Go out and get it. But if the music stops, can you survive?
[Guest 1]: Or are you in a situation where you're just growing your business based on the fact,
[Guest 1]: we'll grow it and let profits look after themselves. Today, that's working.
[Guest 1]: Nobody is asking whether Paytm is making money or not. Big Basket is losing money or not. Zomato
[Guest 1]: lost more money this quarter and its share price went up. It's absurd, right? At one level,
[Guest 1]: or you can discount the future infinitely. By 2041, they'll make money. Fine. Sounds logical
[Guest 1]: if you believe that what happened last year and the year before will continue.
[Guest 1]: But we've seen Talib fooled by randomness, right? This was random. It's not going to be the same.
[Guest 1]: For 365, four days, the turkey gets fed on the 365th day, he gets slaughtered for Thanksgiving.
[Guest 1]: Thanksgiving is around the corner, by the way. So, there may be, this may happen. It will happen.
[Guest 1]: Will it happen tomorrow? Will it happen next month? Will it happen a year from now? We don't know.
[Guest 1]: We don't know. But if you believe that what has happened, in a sense, all the way from 99,
[Guest 1]: from the dot-com bust, more money, more money, more money, the Greenspan port,
[Guest 1]: and then the global financial crisis, da-da, da-da, da-da, da-da. More money has been created
[Guest 1]: in the last 15 months than in the entire history of mankind. That's a staggering fact. Wow.
[Guest 1]: Wow. There is, at one point in time, the number has gone down, there was 17 trillion dollars,
[Guest 1]: I want to put that in perspective, that is eight times the GDP of India, in negative yielding debt.
[Guest 1]: That means people had lent out 17 trillion dollars and were paying to lend it out.
[Guest 1]: There's that much money. Okay. If you believe that the conditions of easy money created by
[Guest 1]: that are going to continue, you deserve to be slaughtered the day before Thanksgiving.
[Guest 1]: The problem is that nobody is telling them that this can happen. Everybody is saying,
[Amit Varma]: wow, wow, wow, wow, wow, wow. You know, at some level, my sympathy is not even with the guy who
[Amit Varma]: gets in at the top of the stock market and gets blown away. My sympathy is with all those people
[Amit Varma]: who would never even participate, for whom the music doesn't play at all. Correct. You know,
[Guest 1]: and that's kind of my sort of. So, my concern is more macroeconomic. You know, these people
[Guest 1]: I'm working with, those people who overinvested, yeah, I see your point. But what are the long-term
[Guest 1]: repercussions of that? Is that faith in the financial markets dries up. And compared to
[Guest 1]: other large economies in the world, India has a very low participation in financial markets.
[Guest 1]: That's what I'm talking about. Pooja, your response?
[Unknown]: I agree with everything he has said. I don't have anything much to add to. He said it all.
[Amit Varma]: He said it all. So, you know, you guys have been with me for almost three hours. So,
[Amit Varma]: again, very grateful for your time. We'll sort of wrap up with a number of questions,
[Amit Varma]: not immediately. I won't make it so easy. But first, I'll ask you guys. I mean, there are two
[Amit Varma]: versions of this question. What is what makes you hopeful? What makes you despair? And the other
[Amit Varma]: version would be if you look at India, say in 2031, after another decade, that may or may not
[Amit Varma]: be lost. You know, what's your what's the best case scenario or what's the worst case scenario?
[Amit Varma]: So, you could answer it either way you sort of prefer.
[Guest 2]: I, you know, it's so difficult to sort of crystal ball, look into the future,
[Guest 2]: because we have such little information about so many things. And we are going completely by,
[Guest 2]: you know, our anecdotal understanding of the situation. And we are seeing these two
[Guest 2]: contrasting things, the resilience of, like, for instance, the startups, the young men in
[Guest 2]: the villages, who are willing to look at things again, and see what they can do,
[Guest 2]: and if they can be atma nirbhar. And I hope they are and I hope, you know, they will find solutions
[Guest 2]: and they will, you know, do well, despite the government, and the economy will do well,
[Guest 2]: despite the government and somehow, you know, the state will retreat. Because without that,
[Guest 2]: really, how are you going to sort of, you know, come break this cycle, you know, that we are in
[Guest 2]: and more shocks will keep coming of one kind or the other. With every shock, your ability to
[Guest 2]: be resilient also keeps diminishing. I don't have hope at all from the policy system. I don't have
[Guest 2]: hope at all from our politicians, all, all politicians, every shade of, you know, the
[Guest 2]: political spectrum, I, I just have no respect for any of them. And all that I can hope, I mean, for
[Guest 2]: is that individuals and people will sort of find ways of doing things where all these policy
[Guest 2]: challenges and policy mistakes and the politics is sort of less of a dampener on their spirit and
[Guest 2]: their ability to cope with economic hardship and their economic success. But definitely the
[Guest 2]: potential is going to reduce, I'm quite sure of that, the economic potential of the economy and
[Guest 2]: therefore a number of individuals. Will they get a voice? Will they say this? Will we get to hear
[Guest 2]: what they say? I don't know. Will this, will this become an input into any corrections,
[Guest 2]: any politics? I don't know. Without that, can things change? I don't know.
[Guest 1]: In a sense, I told you, yeah, my silver lining, and as I said, it's not big enough to
[Guest 1]: rescue the economy because the kind of numbers we're talking about are not going to be addressed
[Guest 1]: by startups, et cetera, et cetera. So there's lots to despair about, Amit. To my mind, the biggest
[Guest 1]: thing that I despair about is, and you and I have differences on, on education, you know,
[Guest 1]: what is the answer to education? But the question I always ask myself is,
[Guest 1]: so I went to a school, which was an elite school. It was reckoned to be one of the best schools in,
[Guest 1]: certainly in the city, and if you looked at the board results, it was crazy, you know.
[Guest 1]: 10 out of the top 20 people in the ICSC board came from this school.
[Guest 1]: The gap between the education that we got and the government schools was this much, you know,
[Guest 1]: 80 percent. They were 20, we were at 100. My son went to a great school in Delhi,
[Guest 1]: Delhi, and I look at the government schools. Had the gap increased or decreased? It had increased.
[Guest 1]: That 100 percent was now a new number. It was a thousand. Those kids, their exposure to the world
[Guest 1]: was, that guy could step out of Sriram school, and the next day he was in a highly competitive
[Guest 1]: university in the US, Northwestern. He was able to take a grad course at Kellogg Management School,
[Guest 1]: one of the top management schools in the world, and he was comfortable there from day one,
[Guest 1]: which was not true 30 years ago. Kids even who went to a prestigious college in DU,
[Guest 1]: they had a lot of trouble adjusting. This guy could day one. He was on his own,
[Guest 1]: surfing the system. He was prepared for that. Has the gap between his school and the kids who go to
[Guest 1]: and the kids who go to the local school in my village, has it increased massively? The quality
[Guest 1]: of those government schools has improved, but may have gone up by 40, 50 percent in the last
[Guest 1]: generation. The quality of the school my son went to, compared to the school I went to, has gone up
[Guest 1]: many fold. So, I despair. I despair about the gaps being created. As you know, I don't believe in
[Guest 1]: tackling this kind of problem. You need to tackle it at the policy level. Nevertheless,
[Guest 1]: as a humanitarian, it makes me weep when I look at my caretakers' children. What are they going
[Guest 1]: to be equipped for? What place are they going to have in 2035? Are they going to be able to walk
[Guest 1]: into Chicago and work in the finance market? Obviously not. But there's a statistic which
[Guest 1]: says, take it with a pinch of salt, that in India, it takes on average seven generations to move
[Guest 1]: from being, for a family to move from being unskilled to being part of the ruling elite.
[Guest 1]: I can believe that. In Denmark, it takes one generation. We have to create a country through
[Guest 1]: policy, whether by government intervention or freeing up, where you make this kind of mobility
[Guest 1]: possible. Because that's for the good of everybody, right? There must be 10 million guys who are as
[Guest 1]: smart as my son out there, who are not getting a chance. He's not like he's an Einstein or something.
[Guest 1]: There are lots of people who are given the same with nature, but they didn't get the nurture.
[Guest 1]: That's lost potential for the country. I'm not saying the government must do it,
[Guest 1]: my money must go to them. Those are separate issues. This makes me despair because when you
[Guest 1]: have this kind of persistent inequality, you create social tensions. And then those social
[Guest 1]: tensions create further economic tension. So that is a huge source of despair. And I don't see
[Guest 1]: anything happening out there. I work with several schools. I don't see anything happening out there
[Guest 1]: that's going to correct that. One small thing I will say, which is that there have been genuine
[Guest 1]: efforts in Delhi to improve the quality of government schools. And that's welcome.
[Guest 1]: Is it going to happen in UP tomorrow? No. Is it going to happen in Bihar tomorrow? No.
[Guest 1]: Is it going to happen in Uttarakhand? No.
[Guest 1]: At the policy level, at the macroeconomic policy level, the big things that we talked about,
[Guest 1]: exchange rate, government debt, foreign exchange reserves, competitiveness in the marketplace.
[Guest 1]: Again, I don't see anything happening. There's not even any dialogue.
[Guest 1]: Now, when you talk to somebody like an Ajay Shah, for example, they will say that a lot of reform
[Guest 1]: may have happened in 1991, but it was facilitated by the fact that there'd been a lot of dialogue
[Guest 1]: about what can be done, etc, etc, for 7, 8, 10 years before that. Today, I don't see it happening.
[Guest 1]: I can't say it's not happening. I don't see it happening. Pooja doesn't see it happening, right?
[Guest 1]: So, how is it going to happen? It's not going to happen by magic.
[Guest 1]: If, and the global economy is in completely uncharted territory. We've never seen this
[Guest 1]: before. Like I said, whether in absolute terms or even in percentage terms, never has so much
[Guest 1]: money been created before, so much debt. And we know what happens when debt balloons.
[Guest 1]: We know there's a crisis coming.
[Guest 1]: I actually believe, and I'm not happy to say this, I actually believe that we will see
[Guest 1]: a massive change only if we have another crisis. Because till then, the investment
[Guest 1]: of this government is simply, as we saw with the latest party convention, all is well.
[Guest 1]: If you continue to say all is well, the starting point of solving a problem is to accept a problem.
[Guest 2]: What can be a bigger crisis than the second wave?
[Guest 2]: Exactly. So, the point is that it's not going to come from their realisation that we've got
[Guest 1]: to do something. It's got to come from outside. Meaning, that only if you have a financial crisis,
[Guest 1]: will the problem get solved.
[Guest 1]: So, for as long as LIC is there, there'll be no, and SBI is there, there'll be no bailouts.
[Guest 1]: No, no, no, those numbers are small. Those numbers are small. If you have a global
[Amit Varma]: retraction of liquidity, LIC is tiny.
[Amit Varma]: But is a global retraction of liquidity even possible? Because I assume that in any
[Amit Varma]: So, I don't want to go there.
[Guest 2]: Globally, I think they will move towards universal basic income, because, you know,
[Guest 2]: I think they're increasingly moving into robotic and artificial intelligence and all that. Lot of
[Guest 2]: people will fall out of the labour market. They're already seeing that. And this printing
[Guest 1]: of money is going to carry on probably.
[Unknown]: It can't continue. Something will give somewhere, right?
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: Because money is nothing, right? It's only a medium.
[Guest 1]: So, if that happens, if, you know, money continues to swim around the globe, etc,
[Guest 1]: something will happen, right? You'll have a crisis of inflation then. And like I said,
[Guest 1]: we are the takers of inflation. We are not beneficiaries of inflation. Saudi Arabia will be.
[Amit Varma]: This should be a matter of proud.
[Guest 1]: Duniya ka best inflation yaha hum late hai Bihar se.
[Amit Varma]: Sir, couple of final questions. But before that, an observation that you mentioned the
[Amit Varma]: phrase loss potential. And obviously, all of us know that the biggest loss potential in India is
[Amit Varma]: that women are essentially treated as second-class citizens. 50% of the country is just cut off from
[Amit Varma]: this entire conversation that we're talking about of human capital, employment, all of that. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: I had an episode with Namita Bhandari a while back on, you know, women participation in the
[Amit Varma]: workforce. But that's just one aspect of it. And the issue is just way bigger than this and too
[Amit Varma]: big for this episode. So, we'll leave it for another day. Couple of questions. And the last
[Amit Varma]: one is a nice one. So, in the sense, a cheerful one. So, I'll ask the not so cheerful one first,
[Amit Varma]: which is that, given that all of us in different ways are invested in thinking about this country
[Amit Varma]: as it is today, we write about it, we care about it, we comment on it. To what extent is the
[Amit Varma]: texture of our personal lives affected by the texture of the society around us? For example,
[Amit Varma]: and I'm conflicted about this. For example, often, I feel great despair. But sometimes,
[Amit Varma]: I am chilling, I think, not my circus, not my monkeys. I think, you know, as famously expressed
[Amit Varma]: in Kashi Kahasi, bhar mein jaye duniya, hum bhajaye harmoniya. Right? So, these are two sort of
[Amit Varma]: extremes, I kind of swing back and forth between them. What is it like with you guys? Like Pooja,
[Amit Varma]: for example, I mean, you, you actually live in Delhi, where the air is also a problem,
[Amit Varma]: but that's another matter. But you know, how do you manage that? Is this something that you think
[Guest 2]: about? No, I, I do often think about it. And I think one of the reasons, whoever's continuing
[Guest 2]: to be a journalist in this country is, you know, because they think about these things, and they
[Guest 2]: want to, in some way contribute to keeping the dialogue going, otherwise, it'll, you know,
[Guest 2]: whatever little way one can, at least one tries. But I mean, you know, you despair. And then,
[Guest 2]: you know, you say, well, like the young men in the village, you know, we'll do what we can.
[Guest 1]: I mean, that's all. Yeah, that's it. It's a great question, Amit. And so, my answer is at several
[Guest 1]: levels. And it's something that engages me quite deeply at one level. So, one is, you know,
[Guest 1]: unlike, unlike Pooja, who's a professional journalist, etc, I'm not. I have a very,
[Guest 1]: very small contribution to Twitter. And I try and try and make sensible comments over there.
[Guest 1]: Sometimes one despairs. Is anybody listening? Yes, they're not. But that's as much as I can do,
[Guest 1]: right? I can't, I'm not going to become finance minister tomorrow. And I'm not suddenly going to
[Guest 1]: have 50 million followers. So, whatever it is, you know, you contribute with, but that's tiny.
[Guest 1]: The second, which has been sort of an abiding theme of my life, is what can you do in terms of
[Guest 1]: social engagement? I mean, broadly, you know, these get political. So, I just want to,
[Guest 1]: so you call it charity, or you call it social work, or you call it development or whatever it
[Guest 1]: is. So, you know, what can you do over there? And so, there was a period of my life where I did a
[Guest 1]: lot of work there, set up organizations, for example, to work with street kids, or
[Guest 1]: the other aspect of my life, which has always concerned me is performing artists. At some point
[Guest 1]: in time, the hobby and the profession sort of came together. So, at one level, I was working
[Guest 1]: with musicians, running a club, helping independent musicians. At the other level,
[Guest 1]: the company which I co-founded sort of moved towards supporting the performing arts and
[Guest 1]: eventually became a big performing arts manager. Now, I'm not actively involved with them.
[Guest 1]: But, you know, I'd reached a stage about five or seven years ago, when I reached the age of 60,
[Guest 1]: where I was sort of getting to this kind of stage, you know, Bajao Harmonia, you know,
[Guest 1]: go and live in my beautiful little cottage in the mountains and forget all of this. But it doesn't
[Guest 1]: work. You have to, you know, you have to continue to be engaged with society. Otherwise, I might as
[Guest 1]: well just go to Switzerland and get a euthanasia injection. If you all you want to do is sit and
[Guest 1]: look at the mountains, you know, got to be there is a sense of, I've got to give something back.
[Guest 1]: And I was also very clear, just like in my professional life, also in social work,
[Guest 1]: I'm not capable of starting up another front. As far as social work is or contributions in
[Guest 1]: that direction are concerned, I've become very passive, in the sense that there are
[Guest 1]: organizations I've worked with in the past, or set up or whatever it is, and I support them,
[Guest 1]: both financially as well as in terms of the one skill, which I have a little bit of is
[Guest 1]: understanding how to run organizations, a little bit of management, a little bit of planning,
[Guest 1]: etc, etc. During the pandemic, two things happened. One is that I realized that my wealth and my
[Guest 1]: income was unaffected, my wealth was going up, because of what we talked about stock markets.
[Guest 1]: My expenditure was dropping. One of my largest items of expenditure has always been travel,
[Guest 1]: no travel. And so, I said that amount of money which I used to spend on travel,
[Guest 1]: now that all my liabilities are taken care of, you know, parents have gone, son is independent,
[Guest 1]: I don't need to save any more money. Try and find productive ways to put that back into the system.
[Guest 1]: So, all of these things, give a little bit more money to the street kids,
[Guest 1]: support artists, artists who wouldn't have needed support earlier, because they were practicing,
[Guest 1]: performance space is shut, put money back in there. Similarly, when it comes to the startups
[Guest 1]: that I'm working with, I became proactive in terms of, is anybody feeling a financial crunch,
[Guest 1]: that they're going to run out of money two, three, four months down the line. I became proactive in
[Guest 1]: terms of asking them, pressing them to tell me what's happening, what's happening to your cash
[Guest 1]: flows, and becoming the proactive guy out there, saying, look, I see a problem three months down
[Guest 1]: the line. Now, let me get the pool of investors together and say, okay, what do we need to do,
[Guest 1]: in order to make sure that you survive this phase. So, the amount of money that I'm putting on the
[Guest 1]: line is small, you know, it's in proportion with what I've invested earlier, or maybe a little bit
[Guest 1]: more. But what I'm doing is becoming also a lever of bringing a whole lot of people together,
[Guest 1]: and saying, look, I've been working with these guys, they're cash strapped,
[Guest 1]: this is what has happened, I think that they're well positioned to get out of this. So,
[Guest 1]: I became the lever for a whole lot of more, sort of. You became a Hindustan lever. I became a
[Guest 1]: Hindustan lever, correct. These all, you know, you can do as much as your role in the world is, and
[Guest 1]: I've, this is, this is what I could do. But I think actually, if you look at a post-COVID world,
[Guest 1]: you look at a post-COVID world, then I think that this role that I've begun to play,
[Guest 1]: I came into the startup world, we've talked about this earlier, as an investor,
[Guest 1]: just as a way of diversifying my portfolio, and found to my utter surprise, that as much as the
[Guest 1]: checks that I wrote, a lot of young entrepreneurs valued me as somebody who was listening,
[Guest 1]: prepared to commit time and intellectual energy and be an honest mirror to them. And that's proved
[Guest 1]: to be immensely rewarding. Both to me, because like they say, you want to really learn something,
[Guest 1]: teach it. So, in a sense, teaching all those 30 years of my experience, running businesses,
[Guest 1]: setting up, etc, comes to play. It's really easy. It's much easier than running a business,
[Guest 1]: telling somebody how to run a business. It seems to work. Because the kind of relationships which
[Guest 1]: I've developed with some of the people, if you had told me five years ago, that I would have
[Guest 1]: this kind of relationship with young entrepreneurs, people I didn't know, typically by the time you're
[Guest 1]: 40, 45, you stop making new friends, you know, or building new relationships. I formed such deep
[Guest 1]: relationships over the last five, six years. So, it's accidental. It's not that there's something,
[Guest 1]: but I think that I'm actually giving something back now. And this I will continue to do. I'm
[Guest 1]: never going to go into a situation where, boss, I'm now inspecting my roses. I don't think that's
[Guest 2]: going to happen. Essentially, the way to not despair is to do what you do, you know, continue
[Guest 2]: doing what you do. Do a little more than that by way of being a good citizen. And stay out of
[Guest 2]: trouble. Because it's very easy to get into trouble if you do your if you do what you do.
[Amit Varma]: And especially if any Babu has heard him use the phrase inspecting my roses just now,
[Unknown]: they might get the idea for a new department. My final question, which is a final question,
[Amit Varma]: I kind of ask all my guests and recommend, you know, one or multiple books, which you are so
[Amit Varma]: excited about on any subject, which have meant a lot to you in your life, or which you just read
[Amit Varma]: and really like, but books that you want to, you know, sit on a soapbox and stand on a soapbox and
[Amit Varma]: tell, soapbox? Is that the right word? Soapbox. Stand on a soapbox and tell the world, read this.
[Unknown]: I love it so much. The Dharma Forest. Oh, okay. I think it's a really good book. Yeah. It's his
[Guest 2]: take on Mahabharata. It's the first of a triology. It's his first book. He's an economist. I think
[Guest 2]: he's, he's, I don't read Indian authors too much, but I think he's, these days, I'm recommending it
[Guest 2]: to everybody. His use of language and his interpretation of five characters, but especially
[Guest 2]: the way he interprets the relationship between Arjuna and Krishna, whatever little I've not read
[Guest 2]: much, you know, about the Mahabharata, but whatever little I know about it, it's fascinating. I really
[Guest 1]: liked it a lot. Without a shadow of doubt, the better angels of our nature, without a doubt,
[Guest 1]: because it gives you hope. It forces you to look at the really, really long arc of history
[Guest 1]: and does it through data, very, very carefully assimilated data, basically to show
[Guest 1]: that the long arc of history is a reduction in violence demonstrated irrefutably. Now,
[Guest 1]: people can say that, you know, it'll reverse, etc, etc, etc. And the one thing which really
[Guest 1]: remains with me from that book is his takeaway, very difficult to substantiate, but I love it.
[Guest 1]: That one of the reasons that we have less violence is the obvious one, which is that
[Guest 1]: states have become more powerful. You have a state monopoly over violence that we, anybody
[Guest 1]: who's studied a little bit of political theory will tell you that. But the other, which goes
[Guest 1]: to the hearts of people like us who love books, is that one of the reasons is the invention of
[Guest 1]: the printing press and the publishing of novels and the popularization of reading. And what it
[Guest 1]: did was, what does a novel do? It allows you to experience somebody else's life. And when you
[Guest 1]: experience other people's lives, you develop empathy. And as you develop more empathy,
[Guest 1]: you're capable of less violence. I thought this is such a beautiful, such a beautiful philosophical
[Guest 1]: thought, irrespective, you can't back it by theory. It's just, you know, correlation is
[Guest 1]: not causation, but I love the thought. But the data is clear, which is that despite all of the
[Guest 1]: narratives, and if you look at newspapers, you think that all that's happening is that people
[Guest 1]: are murdering each other on a global meta basis. We have become an increasingly less violent society.
[Amit Varma]: I think that's just wonderful. It's a wonderful book. In fact, when I asked myself the question
[Amit Varma]: about a book that changed the way I look at the world, it's Pinker's book, The Blank Slate,
[Amit Varma]: which was just remarkable. You know, I was like one person before it, another person after it.
[Amit Varma]: But thank you so much, both of you for coming and playing harmonia with me.
[Amit Varma]: Hopefully, we can keep these conversations going. Thank you, Amit.
[Guest 1]: And I shall now go back to the mountains and look at my begonia.
[Guest 1]: I've changed it to begonia.
[Amit Varma]: The begonia inspection department.
[Amit Varma]: Past episodes of The Scene and The Unseen at sceneunseen.in. Thank you for listening.